Chapter I.
PETER BREAKS THROUGH


All children, except one, grow up. They soon know that they will grow
up, and the way Wendy knew was this. One day when she was two years old
she was playing in a garden, and she plucked another flower and ran
with it to her mother. I suppose she must have looked rather
delightful, for Mrs. Darling put her hand to her heart and cried, “Oh,
why can’t you remain like this for ever!” This was all that passed
between them on the subject, but henceforth Wendy knew that she must
grow up. You always know after you are two. Two is the beginning of the
end.

Of course they lived at 14, and until Wendy came her mother was the
chief one. She was a lovely lady, with a romantic mind and such a sweet
mocking mouth. Her romantic mind was like the tiny boxes, one within
the other, that come from the puzzling East, however many you discover
there is always one more; and her sweet mocking mouth had one kiss on
it that Wendy could never get, though there it was, perfectly
conspicuous in the right-hand corner.

The way Mr. Darling won her was this: the many gentlemen who had been
boys when she was a girl discovered simultaneously that they loved her,
and they all ran to her house to propose to her except Mr. Darling, who
took a cab and nipped in first, and so he got her. He got all of her,
except the innermost box and the kiss. He never knew about the box, and
in time he gave up trying for the kiss. Wendy thought Napoleon could
have got it, but I can picture him trying, and then going off in a
passion, slamming the door.

Mr. Darling used to boast to Wendy that her mother not only loved him
but respected him. He was one of those deep ones who know about stocks
and shares. Of course no one really knows, but he quite seemed to know,
and he often said stocks were up and shares were down in a way that
would have made any woman respect him.

Mrs. Darling was married in white, and at first she kept the books
perfectly, almost gleefully, as if it were a game, not so much as a
Brussels sprout was missing; but by and by whole cauliflowers dropped
out, and instead of them there were pictures of babies without faces.
She drew them when she should have been totting up. They were Mrs.
Darling’s guesses.

Wendy came first, then John, then Michael.

For a week or two after Wendy came it was doubtful whether they would
be able to keep her, as she was another mouth to feed. Mr. Darling was
frightfully proud of her, but he was very honourable, and he sat on the
edge of Mrs. Darling’s bed, holding her hand and calculating expenses,
while she looked at him imploringly. She wanted to risk it, come what
might, but that was not his way; his way was with a pencil and a piece
of paper, and if she confused him with suggestions he had to begin at
the beginning again.

“Now don’t interrupt,” he would beg of her.

“I have one pound seventeen here, and two and six at the office; I can
cut off my coffee at the office, say ten shillings, making two nine and
six, with your eighteen and three makes three nine seven, with five
naught naught in my cheque-book makes eight nine seven—who is that
moving?—eight nine seven, dot and carry seven—don’t speak, my own—and
the pound you lent to that man who came to the door—quiet, child—dot
and carry child—there, you’ve done it!—did I say nine nine seven? yes,
I said nine nine seven; the question is, can we try it for a year on
nine nine seven?”

“Of course we can, George,” she cried. But she was prejudiced in
Wendy’s favour, and he was really the grander character of the two.

“Remember mumps,” he warned her almost threateningly, and off he went
again. “Mumps one pound, that is what I have put down, but I daresay it
will be more like thirty shillings—don’t speak—measles one five, German
measles half a guinea, makes two fifteen six—don’t waggle your
finger—whooping-cough, say fifteen shillings”—and so on it went, and it
added up differently each time; but at last Wendy just got through,
with mumps reduced to twelve six, and the two kinds of measles treated
as one.

There was the same excitement over John, and Michael had even a
narrower squeak; but both were kept, and soon, you might have seen the
three of them going in a row to Miss Fulsom’s Kindergarten school,
accompanied by their nurse.

Mrs. Darling loved to have everything just so, and Mr. Darling had a
passion for being exactly like his neighbours; so, of course, they had
a nurse. As they were poor, owing to the amount of milk the children
drank, this nurse was a prim Newfoundland dog, called Nana, who had
belonged to no one in particular until the Darlings engaged her. She
had always thought children important, however, and the Darlings had
become acquainted with her in Kensington Gardens, where she spent most
of her spare time peeping into perambulators, and was much hated by
careless nursemaids, whom she followed to their homes and complained of
to their mistresses. She proved to be quite a treasure of a nurse. How
thorough she was at bath-time, and up at any moment of the night if one
of her charges made the slightest cry. Of course her kennel was in the
nursery. She had a genius for knowing when a cough is a thing to have
no patience with and when it needs stocking around your throat. She
believed to her last day in old-fashioned remedies like rhubarb leaf,
and made sounds of contempt over all this new-fangled talk about germs,
and so on. It was a lesson in propriety to see her escorting the
children to school, walking sedately by their side when they were well
behaved, and butting them back into line if they strayed. On John’s
footer days she never once forgot his sweater, and she usually carried
an umbrella in her mouth in case of rain. There is a room in the
basement of Miss Fulsom’s school where the nurses wait. They sat on
forms, while Nana lay on the floor, but that was the only difference.
They affected to ignore her as of an inferior social status to
themselves, and she despised their light talk. She resented visits to
the nursery from Mrs. Darling’s friends, but if they did come she first
whipped off Michael’s pinafore and put him into the one with blue
braiding, and smoothed out Wendy and made a dash at John’s hair.

No nursery could possibly have been conducted more correctly, and Mr.
Darling knew it, yet he sometimes wondered uneasily whether the
neighbours talked.

He had his position in the city to consider.

Nana also troubled him in another way. He had sometimes a feeling that
she did not admire him. “I know she admires you tremendously, George,”
Mrs. Darling would assure him, and then she would sign to the children
to be specially nice to father. Lovely dances followed, in which the
only other servant, Liza, was sometimes allowed to join. Such a midget
she looked in her long skirt and maid’s cap, though she had sworn, when
engaged, that she would never see ten again. The gaiety of those romps!
And gayest of all was Mrs. Darling, who would pirouette so wildly that
all you could see of her was the kiss, and then if you had dashed at
her you might have got it. There never was a simpler happier family
until the coming of Peter Pan.

Mrs. Darling first heard of Peter when she was tidying up her
children’s minds. It is the nightly custom of every good mother after
her children are asleep to rummage in their minds and put things
straight for next morning, repacking into their proper places the many
articles that have wandered during the day. If you could keep awake
(but of course you can’t) you would see your own mother doing this, and
you would find it very interesting to watch her. It is quite like
tidying up drawers. You would see her on her knees, I expect, lingering
humorously over some of your contents, wondering where on earth you had
picked this thing up, making discoveries sweet and not so sweet,
pressing this to her cheek as if it were as nice as a kitten, and
hurriedly stowing that out of sight. When you wake in the morning, the
naughtiness and evil passions with which you went to bed have been
folded up small and placed at the bottom of your mind and on the top,
beautifully aired, are spread out your prettier thoughts, ready for you
to put on.

I don’t know whether you have ever seen a map of a person’s mind.
Doctors sometimes draw maps of other parts of you, and your own map can
become intensely interesting, but catch them trying to draw a map of a
child’s mind, which is not only confused, but keeps going round all the
time. There are zigzag lines on it, just like your temperature on a
card, and these are probably roads in the island, for the Neverland is
always more or less an island, with astonishing splashes of colour here
and there, and coral reefs and rakish-looking craft in the offing, and
savages and lonely lairs, and gnomes who are mostly tailors, and caves
through which a river runs, and princes with six elder brothers, and a
hut fast going to decay, and one very small old lady with a hooked
nose. It would be an easy map if that were all, but there is also first
day at school, religion, fathers, the round pond, needle-work, murders,
hangings, verbs that take the dative, chocolate pudding day, getting
into braces, say ninety-nine, three-pence for pulling out your tooth
yourself, and so on, and either these are part of the island or they
are another map showing through, and it is all rather confusing,
especially as nothing will stand still.

Of course the Neverlands vary a good deal. John’s, for instance, had a
lagoon with flamingoes flying over it at which John was shooting, while
Michael, who was very small, had a flamingo with lagoons flying over
it. John lived in a boat turned upside down on the sands, Michael in a
wigwam, Wendy in a house of leaves deftly sewn together. John had no
friends, Michael had friends at night, Wendy had a pet wolf forsaken by
its parents, but on the whole the Neverlands have a family resemblance,
and if they stood still in a row you could say of them that they have
each other’s nose, and so forth. On these magic shores children at play
are for ever beaching their coracles. We too have been there; we can
still hear the sound of the surf, though we shall land no more.

Of all delectable islands the Neverland is the snuggest and most
compact, not large and sprawly, you know, with tedious distances
between one adventure and another, but nicely crammed. When you play at
it by day with the chairs and table-cloth, it is not in the least
alarming, but in the two minutes before you go to sleep it becomes very
real. That is why there are night-lights.

Occasionally in her travels through her children’s minds Mrs. Darling
found things she could not understand, and of these quite the most
perplexing was the word Peter. She knew of no Peter, and yet he was
here and there in John and Michael’s minds, while Wendy’s began to be
scrawled all over with him. The name stood out in bolder letters than
any of the other words, and as Mrs. Darling gazed she felt that it had
an oddly cocky appearance.

“Yes, he is rather cocky,” Wendy admitted with regret. Her mother had
been questioning her.

“But who is he, my pet?”

“He is Peter Pan, you know, mother.”

At first Mrs. Darling did not know, but after thinking back into her
childhood she just remembered a Peter Pan who was said to live with the
fairies. There were odd stories about him, as that when children died
he went part of the way with them, so that they should not be
frightened. She had believed in him at the time, but now that she was
married and full of sense she quite doubted whether there was any such
person.

“Besides,” she said to Wendy, “he would be grown up by this time.”

“Oh no, he isn’t grown up,” Wendy assured her confidently, “and he is
just my size.” She meant that he was her size in both mind and body;
she didn’t know how she knew, she just knew it.

Mrs. Darling consulted Mr. Darling, but he smiled pooh-pooh. “Mark my
words,” he said, “it is some nonsense Nana has been putting into their
heads; just the sort of idea a dog would have. Leave it alone, and it
will blow over.”

But it would not blow over and soon the troublesome boy gave Mrs.
Darling quite a shock.

Children have the strangest adventures without being troubled by them.
For instance, they may remember to mention, a week after the event
happened, that when they were in the wood they had met their dead
father and had a game with him. It was in this casual way that Wendy
one morning made a disquieting revelation. Some leaves of a tree had
been found on the nursery floor, which certainly were not there when
the children went to bed, and Mrs. Darling was puzzling over them when
Wendy said with a tolerant smile:

“I do believe it is that Peter again!”

“Whatever do you mean, Wendy?”

“It is so naughty of him not to wipe his feet,” Wendy said, sighing.
She was a tidy child.

She explained in quite a matter-of-fact way that she thought Peter
sometimes came to the nursery in the night and sat on the foot of her
bed and played on his pipes to her. Unfortunately she never woke, so
she didn’t know how she knew, she just knew.

“What nonsense you talk, precious. No one can get into the house
without knocking.”

“I think he comes in by the window,” she said.

“My love, it is three floors up.”

“Were not the leaves at the foot of the window, mother?”

It was quite true; the leaves had been found very near the window.

Mrs. Darling did not know what to think, for it all seemed so natural
to Wendy that you could not dismiss it by saying she had been dreaming.

“My child,” the mother cried, “why did you not tell me of this before?”

“I forgot,” said Wendy lightly. She was in a hurry to get her
breakfast.

Oh, surely she must have been dreaming.

But, on the other hand, there were the leaves. Mrs. Darling examined
them very carefully; they were skeleton leaves, but she was sure they
did not come from any tree that grew in England. She crawled about the
floor, peering at it with a candle for marks of a strange foot. She
rattled the poker up the chimney and tapped the walls. She let down a
tape from the window to the pavement, and it was a sheer drop of thirty
feet, without so much as a spout to climb up by.

Certainly Wendy had been dreaming.

But Wendy had not been dreaming, as the very next night showed, the
night on which the extraordinary adventures of these children may be
said to have begun.

On the night we speak of all the children were once more in bed. It
happened to be Nana’s evening off, and Mrs. Darling had bathed them and
sung to them till one by one they had let go her hand and slid away
into the land of sleep.

All were looking so safe and cosy that she smiled at her fears now and
sat down tranquilly by the fire to sew.

It was something for Michael, who on his birthday was getting into
shirts. The fire was warm, however, and the nursery dimly lit by three
night-lights, and presently the sewing lay on Mrs. Darling’s lap. Then
her head nodded, oh, so gracefully. She was asleep. Look at the four of
them, Wendy and Michael over there, John here, and Mrs. Darling by the
fire. There should have been a fourth night-light.

While she slept she had a dream. She dreamt that the Neverland had come
too near and that a strange boy had broken through from it. He did not
alarm her, for she thought she had seen him before in the faces of many
women who have no children. Perhaps he is to be found in the faces of
some mothers also. But in her dream he had rent the film that obscures
the Neverland, and she saw Wendy and John and Michael peeping through
the gap.

The dream by itself would have been a trifle, but while she was
dreaming the window of the nursery blew open, and a boy did drop on the
floor. He was accompanied by a strange light, no bigger than your fist,
which darted about the room like a living thing and I think it must
have been this light that wakened Mrs. Darling.

She started up with a cry, and saw the boy, and somehow she knew at
once that he was Peter Pan. If you or I or Wendy had been there we
should have seen that he was very like Mrs. Darling’s kiss. He was a
lovely boy, clad in skeleton leaves and the juices that ooze out of
trees but the most entrancing thing about him was that he had all his
first teeth. When he saw she was a grown-up, he gnashed the little
pearls at her.




Chapter II.
THE SHADOW


Mrs. Darling screamed, and, as if in answer to a bell, the door opened,
and Nana entered, returned from her evening out. She growled and sprang
at the boy, who leapt lightly through the window. Again Mrs. Darling
screamed, this time in distress for him, for she thought he was killed,
and she ran down into the street to look for his little body, but it
was not there; and she looked up, and in the black night she could see
nothing but what she thought was a shooting star.

She returned to the nursery, and found Nana with something in her
mouth, which proved to be the boy’s shadow. As he leapt at the window
Nana had closed it quickly, too late to catch him, but his shadow had
not had time to get out; slam went the window and snapped it off.

You may be sure Mrs. Darling examined the shadow carefully, but it was
quite the ordinary kind.

Nana had no doubt of what was the best thing to do with this shadow.
She hung it out at the window, meaning “He is sure to come back for it;
let us put it where he can get it easily without disturbing the
children.”

But unfortunately Mrs. Darling could not leave it hanging out at the
window, it looked so like the washing and lowered the whole tone of the
house. She thought of showing it to Mr. Darling, but he was totting up
winter great-coats for John and Michael, with a wet towel around his
head to keep his brain clear, and it seemed a shame to trouble him;
besides, she knew exactly what he would say: “It all comes of having a
dog for a nurse.”

She decided to roll the shadow up and put it away carefully in a
drawer, until a fitting opportunity came for telling her husband. Ah
me!

The opportunity came a week later, on that never-to-be-forgotten
Friday. Of course it was a Friday.

“I ought to have been specially careful on a Friday,” she used to say
afterwards to her husband, while perhaps Nana was on the other side of
her, holding her hand.

“No, no,” Mr. Darling always said, “I am responsible for it all. I,
George Darling, did it. _Mea culpa, mea culpa_.” He had had a classical
education.

They sat thus night after night recalling that fatal Friday, till every
detail of it was stamped on their brains and came through on the other
side like the faces on a bad coinage.

“If only I had not accepted that invitation to dine at 27,” Mrs.
Darling said.

“If only I had not poured my medicine into Nana’s bowl,” said Mr.
Darling.

“If only I had pretended to like the medicine,” was what Nana’s wet
eyes said.

“My liking for parties, George.”

“My fatal gift of humour, dearest.”

“My touchiness about trifles, dear master and mistress.”

Then one or more of them would break down altogether; Nana at the
thought, “It’s true, it’s true, they ought not to have had a dog for a
nurse.” Many a time it was Mr. Darling who put the handkerchief to
Nana’s eyes.

“That fiend!” Mr. Darling would cry, and Nana’s bark was the echo of
it, but Mrs. Darling never upbraided Peter; there was something in the
right-hand corner of her mouth that wanted her not to call Peter names.

They would sit there in the empty nursery, recalling fondly every
smallest detail of that dreadful evening. It had begun so uneventfully,
so precisely like a hundred other evenings, with Nana putting on the
water for Michael’s bath and carrying him to it on her back.

“I won’t go to bed,” he had shouted, like one who still believed that
he had the last word on the subject, “I won’t, I won’t. Nana, it isn’t
six o’clock yet. Oh dear, oh dear, I shan’t love you any more, Nana. I
tell you I won’t be bathed, I won’t, I won’t!”

Then Mrs. Darling had come in, wearing her white evening-gown. She had
dressed early because Wendy so loved to see her in her evening-gown,
with the necklace George had given her. She was wearing Wendy’s
bracelet on her arm; she had asked for the loan of it. Wendy loved to
lend her bracelet to her mother.

She had found her two older children playing at being herself and
father on the occasion of Wendy’s birth, and John was saying:

“I am happy to inform you, Mrs. Darling, that you are now a mother,” in
just such a tone as Mr. Darling himself may have used on the real
occasion.

Wendy had danced with joy, just as the real Mrs. Darling must have
done.

Then John was born, with the extra pomp that he conceived due to the
birth of a male, and Michael came from his bath to ask to be born also,
but John said brutally that they did not want any more.

Michael had nearly cried. “Nobody wants me,” he said, and of course the
lady in the evening-dress could not stand that.

“I do,” she said, “I so want a third child.”

“Boy or girl?” asked Michael, not too hopefully.

“Boy.”

Then he had leapt into her arms. Such a little thing for Mr. and Mrs.
Darling and Nana to recall now, but not so little if that was to be
Michael’s last night in the nursery.

They go on with their recollections.

“It was then that I rushed in like a tornado, wasn’t it?” Mr. Darling
would say, scorning himself; and indeed he had been like a tornado.

Perhaps there was some excuse for him. He, too, had been dressing for
the party, and all had gone well with him until he came to his tie. It
is an astounding thing to have to tell, but this man, though he knew
about stocks and shares, had no real mastery of his tie. Sometimes the
thing yielded to him without a contest, but there were occasions when
it would have been better for the house if he had swallowed his pride
and used a made-up tie.

This was such an occasion. He came rushing into the nursery with the
crumpled little brute of a tie in his hand.

“Why, what is the matter, father dear?”

“Matter!” he yelled; he really yelled. “This tie, it will not tie.” He
became dangerously sarcastic. “Not round my neck! Round the bed-post!
Oh yes, twenty times have I made it up round the bed-post, but round my
neck, no! Oh dear no! begs to be excused!”

He thought Mrs. Darling was not sufficiently impressed, and he went on
sternly, “I warn you of this, mother, that unless this tie is round my
neck we don’t go out to dinner to-night, and if I don’t go out to
dinner to-night, I never go to the office again, and if I don’t go to
the office again, you and I starve, and our children will be flung into
the streets.”

Even then Mrs. Darling was placid. “Let me try, dear,” she said, and
indeed that was what he had come to ask her to do, and with her nice
cool hands she tied his tie for him, while the children stood around to
see their fate decided. Some men would have resented her being able to
do it so easily, but Mr. Darling had far too fine a nature for that; he
thanked her carelessly, at once forgot his rage, and in another moment
was dancing round the room with Michael on his back.

“How wildly we romped!” says Mrs. Darling now, recalling it.

“Our last romp!” Mr. Darling groaned.

“O George, do you remember Michael suddenly said to me, ‘How did you
get to know me, mother?’”

“I remember!”

“They were rather sweet, don’t you think, George?”

“And they were ours, ours! and now they are gone.”

The romp had ended with the appearance of Nana, and most unluckily Mr.
Darling collided against her, covering his trousers with hairs. They
were not only new trousers, but they were the first he had ever had
with braid on them, and he had had to bite his lip to prevent the tears
coming. Of course Mrs. Darling brushed him, but he began to talk again
about its being a mistake to have a dog for a nurse.

“George, Nana is a treasure.”

“No doubt, but I have an uneasy feeling at times that she looks upon
the children as puppies.”

“Oh no, dear one, I feel sure she knows they have souls.”

“I wonder,” Mr. Darling said thoughtfully, “I wonder.” It was an
opportunity, his wife felt, for telling him about the boy. At first he
pooh-poohed the story, but he became thoughtful when she showed him the
shadow.

“It is nobody I know,” he said, examining it carefully, “but it does
look a scoundrel.”

“We were still discussing it, you remember,” says Mr. Darling, “when
Nana came in with Michael’s medicine. You will never carry the bottle
in your mouth again, Nana, and it is all my fault.”

Strong man though he was, there is no doubt that he had behaved rather
foolishly over the medicine. If he had a weakness, it was for thinking
that all his life he had taken medicine boldly, and so now, when
Michael dodged the spoon in Nana’s mouth, he had said reprovingly, “Be
a man, Michael.”

“Won’t; won’t!” Michael cried naughtily. Mrs. Darling left the room to
get a chocolate for him, and Mr. Darling thought this showed want of
firmness.

“Mother, don’t pamper him,” he called after her. “Michael, when I was
your age I took medicine without a murmur. I said, ‘Thank you, kind
parents, for giving me bottles to make me well.’”

He really thought this was true, and Wendy, who was now in her
night-gown, believed it also, and she said, to encourage Michael, “That
medicine you sometimes take, father, is much nastier, isn’t it?”

“Ever so much nastier,” Mr. Darling said bravely, “and I would take it
now as an example to you, Michael, if I hadn’t lost the bottle.”

He had not exactly lost it; he had climbed in the dead of night to the
top of the wardrobe and hidden it there. What he did not know was that
the faithful Liza had found it, and put it back on his wash-stand.

“I know where it is, father,” Wendy cried, always glad to be of
service. “I’ll bring it,” and she was off before he could stop her.
Immediately his spirits sank in the strangest way.

“John,” he said, shuddering, “it’s most beastly stuff. It’s that nasty,
sticky, sweet kind.”

“It will soon be over, father,” John said cheerily, and then in rushed
Wendy with the medicine in a glass.

“I have been as quick as I could,” she panted.

“You have been wonderfully quick,” her father retorted, with a
vindictive politeness that was quite thrown away upon her. “Michael
first,” he said doggedly.

“Father first,” said Michael, who was of a suspicious nature.

“I shall be sick, you know,” Mr. Darling said threateningly.

“Come on, father,” said John.

“Hold your tongue, John,” his father rapped out.

Wendy was quite puzzled. “I thought you took it quite easily, father.”

“That is not the point,” he retorted. “The point is, that there is more
in my glass than in Michael’s spoon.” His proud heart was nearly
bursting. “And it isn’t fair: I would say it though it were with my
last breath; it isn’t fair.”

“Father, I am waiting,” said Michael coldly.

“It’s all very well to say you are waiting; so am I waiting.”

“Father’s a cowardly custard.”

“So are you a cowardly custard.”

“I’m not frightened.”

“Neither am I frightened.”

“Well, then, take it.”

“Well, then, you take it.”

Wendy had a splendid idea. “Why not both take it at the same time?”

“Certainly,” said Mr. Darling. “Are you ready, Michael?”

Wendy gave the words, one, two, three, and Michael took his medicine,
but Mr. Darling slipped his behind his back.

There was a yell of rage from Michael, and “O father!” Wendy exclaimed.

“What do you mean by ‘O father’?” Mr. Darling demanded. “Stop that row,
Michael. I meant to take mine, but I—I missed it.”

It was dreadful the way all the three were looking at him, just as if
they did not admire him. “Look here, all of you,” he said entreatingly,
as soon as Nana had gone into the bathroom. “I have just thought of a
splendid joke. I shall pour my medicine into Nana’s bowl, and she will
drink it, thinking it is milk!”

It was the colour of milk; but the children did not have their father’s
sense of humour, and they looked at him reproachfully as he poured the
medicine into Nana’s bowl. “What fun!” he said doubtfully, and they did
not dare expose him when Mrs. Darling and Nana returned.

“Nana, good dog,” he said, patting her, “I have put a little milk into
your bowl, Nana.”

Nana wagged her tail, ran to the medicine, and began lapping it. Then
she gave Mr. Darling such a look, not an angry look: she showed him the
great red tear that makes us so sorry for noble dogs, and crept into
her kennel.

Mr. Darling was frightfully ashamed of himself, but he would not give
in. In a horrid silence Mrs. Darling smelt the bowl. “O George,” she
said, “it’s your medicine!”

“It was only a joke,” he roared, while she comforted her boys, and
Wendy hugged Nana. “Much good,” he said bitterly, “my wearing myself to
the bone trying to be funny in this house.”

And still Wendy hugged Nana. “That’s right,” he shouted. “Coddle her!
Nobody coddles me. Oh dear no! I am only the breadwinner, why should I
be coddled—why, why, why!”

“George,” Mrs. Darling entreated him, “not so loud; the servants will
hear you.” Somehow they had got into the way of calling Liza the
servants.

“Let them!” he answered recklessly. “Bring in the whole world. But I
refuse to allow that dog to lord it in my nursery for an hour longer.”

The children wept, and Nana ran to him beseechingly, but he waved her
back. He felt he was a strong man again. “In vain, in vain,” he cried;
“the proper place for you is the yard, and there you go to be tied up
this instant.”

“George, George,” Mrs. Darling whispered, “remember what I told you
about that boy.”

Alas, he would not listen. He was determined to show who was master in
that house, and when commands would not draw Nana from the kennel, he
lured her out of it with honeyed words, and seizing her roughly,
dragged her from the nursery. He was ashamed of himself, and yet he did
it. It was all owing to his too affectionate nature, which craved for
admiration. When he had tied her up in the back-yard, the wretched
father went and sat in the passage, with his knuckles to his eyes.

In the meantime Mrs. Darling had put the children to bed in unwonted
silence and lit their night-lights. They could hear Nana barking, and
John whimpered, “It is because he is chaining her up in the yard,” but
Wendy was wiser.

“That is not Nana’s unhappy bark,” she said, little guessing what was
about to happen; “that is her bark when she smells danger.”

Danger!

“Are you sure, Wendy?”

“Oh, yes.”

Mrs. Darling quivered and went to the window. It was securely fastened.
She looked out, and the night was peppered with stars. They were
crowding round the house, as if curious to see what was to take place
there, but she did not notice this, nor that one or two of the smaller
ones winked at her. Yet a nameless fear clutched at her heart and made
her cry, “Oh, how I wish that I wasn’t going to a party to-night!”

Even Michael, already half asleep, knew that she was perturbed, and he
asked, “Can anything harm us, mother, after the night-lights are lit?”

“Nothing, precious,” she said; “they are the eyes a mother leaves
behind her to guard her children.”

She went from bed to bed singing enchantments over them, and little
Michael flung his arms round her. “Mother,” he cried, “I’m glad of
you.” They were the last words she was to hear from him for a long
time.

No. 27 was only a few yards distant, but there had been a slight fall
of snow, and Father and Mother Darling picked their way over it deftly
not to soil their shoes. They were already the only persons in the
street, and all the stars were watching them. Stars are beautiful, but
they may not take an active part in anything, they must just look on
for ever. It is a punishment put on them for something they did so long
ago that no star now knows what it was. So the older ones have become
glassy-eyed and seldom speak (winking is the star language), but the
little ones still wonder. They are not really friendly to Peter, who
had a mischievous way of stealing up behind them and trying to blow
them out; but they are so fond of fun that they were on his side
to-night, and anxious to get the grown-ups out of the way. So as soon
as the door of 27 closed on Mr. and Mrs. Darling there was a commotion
in the firmament, and the smallest of all the stars in the Milky Way
screamed out:

“Now, Peter!”




Chapter III.
COME AWAY, COME AWAY!


For a moment after Mr. and Mrs. Darling left the house the night-lights
by the beds of the three children continued to burn clearly. They were
awfully nice little night-lights, and one cannot help wishing that they
could have kept awake to see Peter; but Wendy’s light blinked and gave
such a yawn that the other two yawned also, and before they could close
their mouths all the three went out.

There was another light in the room now, a thousand times brighter than
the night-lights, and in the time we have taken to say this, it had
been in all the drawers in the nursery, looking for Peter’s shadow,
rummaged the wardrobe and turned every pocket inside out. It was not
really a light; it made this light by flashing about so quickly, but
when it came to rest for a second you saw it was a fairy, no longer
than your hand, but still growing. It was a girl called Tinker Bell
exquisitely gowned in a skeleton leaf, cut low and square, through
which her figure could be seen to the best advantage. She was slightly
inclined to _embonpoint_.

A moment after the fairy’s entrance the window was blown open by the
breathing of the little stars, and Peter dropped in. He had carried
Tinker Bell part of the way, and his hand was still messy with the
fairy dust.

“Tinker Bell,” he called softly, after making sure that the children
were asleep, “Tink, where are you?” She was in a jug for the moment,
and liking it extremely; she had never been in a jug before.

“Oh, do come out of that jug, and tell me, do you know where they put
my shadow?”

The loveliest tinkle as of golden bells answered him. It is the fairy
language. You ordinary children can never hear it, but if you were to
hear it you would know that you had heard it once before.

Tink said that the shadow was in the big box. She meant the chest of
drawers, and Peter jumped at the drawers, scattering their contents to
the floor with both hands, as kings toss ha’pence to the crowd. In a
moment he had recovered his shadow, and in his delight he forgot that
he had shut Tinker Bell up in the drawer.

If he thought at all, but I don’t believe he ever thought, it was that
he and his shadow, when brought near each other, would join like drops
of water, and when they did not he was appalled. He tried to stick it
on with soap from the bathroom, but that also failed. A shudder passed
through Peter, and he sat on the floor and cried.

His sobs woke Wendy, and she sat up in bed. She was not alarmed to see
a stranger crying on the nursery floor; she was only pleasantly
interested.

“Boy,” she said courteously, “why are you crying?”

Peter could be exceeding polite also, having learned the grand manner
at fairy ceremonies, and he rose and bowed to her beautifully. She was
much pleased, and bowed beautifully to him from the bed.

“What’s your name?” he asked.

“Wendy Moira Angela Darling,” she replied with some satisfaction. “What
is your name?”

“Peter Pan.”

She was already sure that he must be Peter, but it did seem a
comparatively short name.

“Is that all?”

“Yes,” he said rather sharply. He felt for the first time that it was a
shortish name.

“I’m so sorry,” said Wendy Moira Angela.

“It doesn’t matter,” Peter gulped.

She asked where he lived.

“Second to the right,” said Peter, “and then straight on till morning.”

“What a funny address!”

Peter had a sinking. For the first time he felt that perhaps it was a
funny address.

“No, it isn’t,” he said.

“I mean,” Wendy said nicely, remembering that she was hostess, “is that
what they put on the letters?”

He wished she had not mentioned letters.

“Don’t get any letters,” he said contemptuously.

“But your mother gets letters?”

“Don’t have a mother,” he said. Not only had he no mother, but he had
not the slightest desire to have one. He thought them very over-rated
persons. Wendy, however, felt at once that she was in the presence of a
tragedy.

“O Peter, no wonder you were crying,” she said, and got out of bed and
ran to him.

“I wasn’t crying about mothers,” he said rather indignantly. “I was
crying because I can’t get my shadow to stick on. Besides, I wasn’t
crying.”

“It has come off?”

“Yes.”

Then Wendy saw the shadow on the floor, looking so draggled, and she
was frightfully sorry for Peter. “How awful!” she said, but she could
not help smiling when she saw that he had been trying to stick it on
with soap. How exactly like a boy!

Fortunately she knew at once what to do. “It must be sewn on,” she
said, just a little patronisingly.

“What’s sewn?” he asked.

“You’re dreadfully ignorant.”

“No, I’m not.”

But she was exulting in his ignorance. “I shall sew it on for you, my
little man,” she said, though he was tall as herself, and she got out
her housewife, and sewed the shadow on to Peter’s foot.

“I daresay it will hurt a little,” she warned him.

“Oh, I shan’t cry,” said Peter, who was already of the opinion that he
had never cried in his life. And he clenched his teeth and did not cry,
and soon his shadow was behaving properly, though still a little
creased.

“Perhaps I should have ironed it,” Wendy said thoughtfully, but Peter,
boylike, was indifferent to appearances, and he was now jumping about
in the wildest glee. Alas, he had already forgotten that he owed his
bliss to Wendy. He thought he had attached the shadow himself. “How
clever I am!” he crowed rapturously, “oh, the cleverness of me!”

It is humiliating to have to confess that this conceit of Peter was one
of his most fascinating qualities. To put it with brutal frankness,
there never was a cockier boy.

But for the moment Wendy was shocked. “You conceit,” she exclaimed,
with frightful sarcasm; “of course I did nothing!”

“You did a little,” Peter said carelessly, and continued to dance.

“A little!” she replied with hauteur; “if I am no use I can at least
withdraw,” and she sprang in the most dignified way into bed and
covered her face with the blankets.

To induce her to look up he pretended to be going away, and when this
failed he sat on the end of the bed and tapped her gently with his
foot. “Wendy,” he said, “don’t withdraw. I can’t help crowing, Wendy,
when I’m pleased with myself.” Still she would not look up, though she
was listening eagerly. “Wendy,” he continued, in a voice that no woman
has ever yet been able to resist, “Wendy, one girl is more use than
twenty boys.”

Now Wendy was every inch a woman, though there were not very many
inches, and she peeped out of the bed-clothes.

“Do you really think so, Peter?”

“Yes, I do.”

“I think it’s perfectly sweet of you,” she declared, “and I’ll get up
again,” and she sat with him on the side of the bed. She also said she
would give him a kiss if he liked, but Peter did not know what she
meant, and he held out his hand expectantly.

“Surely you know what a kiss is?” she asked, aghast.

“I shall know when you give it to me,” he replied stiffly, and not to
hurt his feeling she gave him a thimble.

“Now,” said he, “shall I give you a kiss?” and she replied with a
slight primness, “If you please.” She made herself rather cheap by
inclining her face toward him, but he merely dropped an acorn button
into her hand, so she slowly returned her face to where it had been
before, and said nicely that she would wear his kiss on the chain
around her neck. It was lucky that she did put it on that chain, for it
was afterwards to save her life.

When people in our set are introduced, it is customary for them to ask
each other’s age, and so Wendy, who always liked to do the correct
thing, asked Peter how old he was. It was not really a happy question
to ask him; it was like an examination paper that asks grammar, when
what you want to be asked is Kings of England.

“I don’t know,” he replied uneasily, “but I am quite young.” He really
knew nothing about it, he had merely suspicions, but he said at a
venture, “Wendy, I ran away the day I was born.”

Wendy was quite surprised, but interested; and she indicated in the
charming drawing-room manner, by a touch on her night-gown, that he
could sit nearer her.

“It was because I heard father and mother,” he explained in a low
voice, “talking about what I was to be when I became a man.” He was
extraordinarily agitated now. “I don’t want ever to be a man,” he said
with passion. “I want always to be a little boy and to have fun. So I
ran away to Kensington Gardens and lived a long long time among the
fairies.”

She gave him a look of the most intense admiration, and he thought it
was because he had run away, but it was really because he knew fairies.
Wendy had lived such a home life that to know fairies struck her as
quite delightful. She poured out questions about them, to his surprise,
for they were rather a nuisance to him, getting in his way and so on,
and indeed he sometimes had to give them a hiding. Still, he liked them
on the whole, and he told her about the beginning of fairies.

“You see, Wendy, when the first baby laughed for the first time, its
laugh broke into a thousand pieces, and they all went skipping about,
and that was the beginning of fairies.”

Tedious talk this, but being a stay-at-home she liked it.

“And so,” he went on good-naturedly, “there ought to be one fairy for
every boy and girl.”

“Ought to be? Isn’t there?”

“No. You see children know such a lot now, they soon don’t believe in
fairies, and every time a child says, ‘I don’t believe in fairies,’
there is a fairy somewhere that falls down dead.”

Really, he thought they had now talked enough about fairies, and it
struck him that Tinker Bell was keeping very quiet. “I can’t think
where she has gone to,” he said, rising, and he called Tink by name.
Wendy’s heart went flutter with a sudden thrill.

“Peter,” she cried, clutching him, “you don’t mean to tell me that
there is a fairy in this room!”

“She was here just now,” he said a little impatiently. “You don’t hear
her, do you?” and they both listened.

“The only sound I hear,” said Wendy, “is like a tinkle of bells.”

“Well, that’s Tink, that’s the fairy language. I think I hear her too.”

The sound came from the chest of drawers, and Peter made a merry face.
No one could ever look quite so merry as Peter, and the loveliest of
gurgles was his laugh. He had his first laugh still.

“Wendy,” he whispered gleefully, “I do believe I shut her up in the
drawer!”

He let poor Tink out of the drawer, and she flew about the nursery
screaming with fury. “You shouldn’t say such things,” Peter retorted.
“Of course I’m very sorry, but how could I know you were in the
drawer?”

Wendy was not listening to him. “O Peter,” she cried, “if she would
only stand still and let me see her!”

“They hardly ever stand still,” he said, but for one moment Wendy saw
the romantic figure come to rest on the cuckoo clock. “O the lovely!”
she cried, though Tink’s face was still distorted with passion.

“Tink,” said Peter amiably, “this lady says she wishes you were her
fairy.”

Tinker Bell answered insolently.

“What does she say, Peter?”

He had to translate. “She is not very polite. She says you are a great
ugly girl, and that she is my fairy.”

He tried to argue with Tink. “You know you can’t be my fairy, Tink,
because I am an gentleman and you are a lady.”

To this Tink replied in these words, “You silly ass,” and disappeared
into the bathroom. “She is quite a common fairy,” Peter explained
apologetically, “she is called Tinker Bell because she mends the pots
and kettles.”

They were together in the armchair by this time, and Wendy plied him
with more questions.

“If you don’t live in Kensington Gardens now—”

“Sometimes I do still.”

“But where do you live mostly now?”

“With the lost boys.”

“Who are they?”

“They are the children who fall out of their perambulators when the
nurse is looking the other way. If they are not claimed in seven days
they are sent far away to the Neverland to defray expenses. I’m
captain.”

“What fun it must be!”

“Yes,” said cunning Peter, “but we are rather lonely. You see we have
no female companionship.”

“Are none of the others girls?”

“Oh, no; girls, you know, are much too clever to fall out of their
prams.”

This flattered Wendy immensely. “I think,” she said, “it is perfectly
lovely the way you talk about girls; John there just despises us.”

For reply Peter rose and kicked John out of bed, blankets and all; one
kick. This seemed to Wendy rather forward for a first meeting, and she
told him with spirit that he was not captain in her house. However,
John continued to sleep so placidly on the floor that she allowed him
to remain there. “And I know you meant to be kind,” she said,
relenting, “so you may give me a kiss.”

For the moment she had forgotten his ignorance about kisses. “I thought
you would want it back,” he said a little bitterly, and offered to
return her the thimble.

“Oh dear,” said the nice Wendy, “I don’t mean a kiss, I mean a
thimble.”

“What’s that?”

“It’s like this.” She kissed him.

“Funny!” said Peter gravely. “Now shall I give you a thimble?”

“If you wish to,” said Wendy, keeping her head erect this time.

Peter thimbled her, and almost immediately she screeched. “What is it,
Wendy?”

“It was exactly as if someone were pulling my hair.”

“That must have been Tink. I never knew her so naughty before.”

And indeed Tink was darting about again, using offensive language.

“She says she will do that to you, Wendy, every time I give you a
thimble.”

“But why?”

“Why, Tink?”

Again Tink replied, “You silly ass.” Peter could not understand why,
but Wendy understood, and she was just slightly disappointed when he
admitted that he came to the nursery window not to see her but to
listen to stories.

“You see, I don’t know any stories. None of the lost boys knows any
stories.”

“How perfectly awful,” Wendy said.

“Do you know,” Peter asked “why swallows build in the eaves of houses?
It is to listen to the stories. O Wendy, your mother was telling you
such a lovely story.”

“Which story was it?”

“About the prince who couldn’t find the lady who wore the glass
slipper.”

“Peter,” said Wendy excitedly, “that was Cinderella, and he found her,
and they lived happily ever after.”

Peter was so glad that he rose from the floor, where they had been
sitting, and hurried to the window.

“Where are you going?” she cried with misgiving.

“To tell the other boys.”

“Don’t go Peter,” she entreated, “I know such lots of stories.”

Those were her precise words, so there can be no denying that it was
she who first tempted him.

He came back, and there was a greedy look in his eyes now which ought
to have alarmed her, but did not.

“Oh, the stories I could tell to the boys!” she cried, and then Peter
gripped her and began to draw her toward the window.

“Let me go!” she ordered him.

“Wendy, do come with me and tell the other boys.”

Of course she was very pleased to be asked, but she said, “Oh dear, I
can’t. Think of mummy! Besides, I can’t fly.”

“I’ll teach you.”

“Oh, how lovely to fly.”

“I’ll teach you how to jump on the wind’s back, and then away we go.”

“Oo!” she exclaimed rapturously.

“Wendy, Wendy, when you are sleeping in your silly bed you might be
flying about with me saying funny things to the stars.”

“Oo!”

“And, Wendy, there are mermaids.”

“Mermaids! With tails?”

“Such long tails.”

“Oh,” cried Wendy, “to see a mermaid!”

He had become frightfully cunning. “Wendy,” he said, “how we should all
respect you.”

She was wriggling her body in distress. It was quite as if she were
trying to remain on the nursery floor.

But he had no pity for her.

“Wendy,” he said, the sly one, “you could tuck us in at night.”

“Oo!”

“None of us has ever been tucked in at night.”

“Oo,” and her arms went out to him.

“And you could darn our clothes, and make pockets for us. None of us
has any pockets.”

How could she resist. “Of course it’s awfully fascinating!” she cried.
“Peter, would you teach John and Michael to fly too?”

“If you like,” he said indifferently, and she ran to John and Michael
and shook them. “Wake up,” she cried, “Peter Pan has come and he is to
teach us to fly.”

John rubbed his eyes. “Then I shall get up,” he said. Of course he was
on the floor already. “Hallo,” he said, “I am up!”

Michael was up by this time also, looking as sharp as a knife with six
blades and a saw, but Peter suddenly signed silence. Their faces
assumed the awful craftiness of children listening for sounds from the
grown-up world. All was as still as salt. Then everything was right.
No, stop! Everything was wrong. Nana, who had been barking
distressfully all the evening, was quiet now. It was her silence they
had heard.

“Out with the light! Hide! Quick!” cried John, taking command for the
only time throughout the whole adventure. And thus when Liza entered,
holding Nana, the nursery seemed quite its old self, very dark, and you
would have sworn you heard its three wicked inmates breathing
angelically as they slept. They were really doing it artfully from
behind the window curtains.

Liza was in a bad temper, for she was mixing the Christmas puddings in
the kitchen, and had been drawn from them, with a raisin still on her
cheek, by Nana’s absurd suspicions. She thought the best way of getting
a little quiet was to take Nana to the nursery for a moment, but in
custody of course.

“There, you suspicious brute,” she said, not sorry that Nana was in
disgrace. “They are perfectly safe, aren’t they? Every one of the
little angels sound asleep in bed. Listen to their gentle breathing.”

Here Michael, encouraged by his success, breathed so loudly that they
were nearly detected. Nana knew that kind of breathing, and she tried
to drag herself out of Liza’s clutches.

But Liza was dense. “No more of it, Nana,” she said sternly, pulling
her out of the room. “I warn you if you bark again I shall go straight
for master and missus and bring them home from the party, and then, oh,
won’t master whip you, just.”

She tied the unhappy dog up again, but do you think Nana ceased to
bark? Bring master and missus home from the party! Why, that was just
what she wanted. Do you think she cared whether she was whipped so long
as her charges were safe? Unfortunately Liza returned to her puddings,
and Nana, seeing that no help would come from her, strained and
strained at the chain until at last she broke it. In another moment she
had burst into the dining-room of 27 and flung up her paws to heaven,
her most expressive way of making a communication. Mr. and Mrs. Darling
knew at once that something terrible was happening in their nursery,
and without a good-bye to their hostess they rushed into the street.

But it was now ten minutes since three scoundrels had been breathing
behind the curtains, and Peter Pan can do a great deal in ten minutes.

We now return to the nursery.

“It’s all right,” John announced, emerging from his hiding-place. “I
say, Peter, can you really fly?”

Instead of troubling to answer him Peter flew around the room, taking
the mantelpiece on the way.

“How topping!” said John and Michael.

“How sweet!” cried Wendy.

“Yes, I’m sweet, oh, I am sweet!” said Peter, forgetting his manners
again.

It looked delightfully easy, and they tried it first from the floor and
then from the beds, but they always went down instead of up.

“I say, how do you do it?” asked John, rubbing his knee. He was quite a
practical boy.

“You just think lovely wonderful thoughts,” Peter explained, “and they
lift you up in the air.”

He showed them again.

“You’re so nippy at it,” John said, “couldn’t you do it very slowly
once?”

Peter did it both slowly and quickly. “I’ve got it now, Wendy!” cried
John, but soon he found he had not. Not one of them could fly an inch,
though even Michael was in words of two syllables, and Peter did not
know A from Z.

Of course Peter had been trifling with them, for no one can fly unless
the fairy dust has been blown on him. Fortunately, as we have
mentioned, one of his hands was messy with it, and he blew some on each
of them, with the most superb results.

“Now just wiggle your shoulders this way,” he said, “and let go.”

They were all on their beds, and gallant Michael let go first. He did
not quite mean to let go, but he did it, and immediately he was borne
across the room.

“I flewed!” he screamed while still in mid-air.

John let go and met Wendy near the bathroom.

“Oh, lovely!”

“Oh, ripping!”

“Look at me!”

“Look at me!”

“Look at me!”

They were not nearly so elegant as Peter, they could not help kicking a
little, but their heads were bobbing against the ceiling, and there is
almost nothing so delicious as that. Peter gave Wendy a hand at first,
but had to desist, Tink was so indignant.

Up and down they went, and round and round. Heavenly was Wendy’s word.

“I say,” cried John, “why shouldn’t we all go out?”

Of course it was to this that Peter had been luring them.

Michael was ready: he wanted to see how long it took him to do a
billion miles. But Wendy hesitated.

“Mermaids!” said Peter again.

“Oo!”

“And there are pirates.”

“Pirates,” cried John, seizing his Sunday hat, “let us go at once.”

It was just at this moment that Mr. and Mrs. Darling hurried with Nana
out of 27. They ran into the middle of the street to look up at the
nursery window; and, yes, it was still shut, but the room was ablaze
with light, and most heart-gripping sight of all, they could see in
shadow on the curtain three little figures in night attire circling
round and round, not on the floor but in the air.

Not three figures, four!

In a tremble they opened the street door. Mr. Darling would have rushed
upstairs, but Mrs. Darling signed him to go softly. She even tried to
make her heart go softly.

Will they reach the nursery in time? If so, how delightful for them,
and we shall all breathe a sigh of relief, but there will be no story.
On the other hand, if they are not in time, I solemnly promise that it
will all come right in the end.

They would have reached the nursery in time had it not been that the
little stars were watching them. Once again the stars blew the window
open, and that smallest star of all called out:

“Cave, Peter!”

Then Peter knew that there was not a moment to lose. “Come,” he cried
imperiously, and soared out at once into the night, followed by John
and Michael and Wendy.

Mr. and Mrs. Darling and Nana rushed into the nursery too late. The
birds were flown.




Chapter IV.
THE FLIGHT


“Second to the right, and straight on till morning.”

That, Peter had told Wendy, was the way to the Neverland; but even
birds, carrying maps and consulting them at windy corners, could not
have sighted it with these instructions. Peter, you see, just said
anything that came into his head.

At first his companions trusted him implicitly, and so great were the
delights of flying that they wasted time circling round church spires
or any other tall objects on the way that took their fancy.

John and Michael raced, Michael getting a start.

They recalled with contempt that not so long ago they had thought
themselves fine fellows for being able to fly round a room.

Not long ago. But how long ago? They were flying over the sea before
this thought began to disturb Wendy seriously. John thought it was
their second sea and their third night.

Sometimes it was dark and sometimes light, and now they were very cold
and again too warm. Did they really feel hungry at times, or were they
merely pretending, because Peter had such a jolly new way of feeding
them? His way was to pursue birds who had food in their mouths suitable
for humans and snatch it from them; then the birds would follow and
snatch it back; and they would all go chasing each other gaily for
miles, parting at last with mutual expressions of good-will. But Wendy
noticed with gentle concern that Peter did not seem to know that this
was rather an odd way of getting your bread and butter, nor even that
there are other ways.

Certainly they did not pretend to be sleepy, they were sleepy; and that
was a danger, for the moment they popped off, down they fell. The awful
thing was that Peter thought this funny.

“There he goes again!” he would cry gleefully, as Michael suddenly
dropped like a stone.

“Save him, save him!” cried Wendy, looking with horror at the cruel sea
far below. Eventually Peter would dive through the air, and catch
Michael just before he could strike the sea, and it was lovely the way
he did it; but he always waited till the last moment, and you felt it
was his cleverness that interested him and not the saving of human
life. Also he was fond of variety, and the sport that engrossed him one
moment would suddenly cease to engage him, so there was always the
possibility that the next time you fell he would let you go.

He could sleep in the air without falling, by merely lying on his back
and floating, but this was, partly at least, because he was so light
that if you got behind him and blew he went faster.

“Do be more polite to him,” Wendy whispered to John, when they were
playing “Follow my Leader.”

“Then tell him to stop showing off,” said John.

When playing Follow my Leader, Peter would fly close to the water and
touch each shark’s tail in passing, just as in the street you may run
your finger along an iron railing. They could not follow him in this
with much success, so perhaps it was rather like showing off,
especially as he kept looking behind to see how many tails they missed.

“You must be nice to him,” Wendy impressed on her brothers. “What could
we do if he were to leave us!”

“We could go back,” Michael said.

“How could we ever find our way back without him?”

“Well, then, we could go on,” said John.

“That is the awful thing, John. We should have to go on, for we don’t
know how to stop.”

This was true, Peter had forgotten to show them how to stop.

John said that if the worst came to the worst, all they had to do was
to go straight on, for the world was round, and so in time they must
come back to their own window.

“And who is to get food for us, John?”

“I nipped a bit out of that eagle’s mouth pretty neatly, Wendy.”

“After the twentieth try,” Wendy reminded him. “And even though we
became good at picking up food, see how we bump against clouds and
things if he is not near to give us a hand.”

Indeed they were constantly bumping. They could now fly strongly,
though they still kicked far too much; but if they saw a cloud in front
of them, the more they tried to avoid it, the more certainly did they
bump into it. If Nana had been with them, she would have had a bandage
round Michael’s forehead by this time.

Peter was not with them for the moment, and they felt rather lonely up
there by themselves. He could go so much faster than they that he would
suddenly shoot out of sight, to have some adventure in which they had
no share. He would come down laughing over something fearfully funny he
had been saying to a star, but he had already forgotten what it was, or
he would come up with mermaid scales still sticking to him, and yet not
be able to say for certain what had been happening. It was really
rather irritating to children who had never seen a mermaid.

“And if he forgets them so quickly,” Wendy argued, “how can we expect
that he will go on remembering us?”

Indeed, sometimes when he returned he did not remember them, at least
not well. Wendy was sure of it. She saw recognition come into his eyes
as he was about to pass them the time of day and go on; once even she
had to call him by name.

“I’m Wendy,” she said agitatedly.

He was very sorry. “I say, Wendy,” he whispered to her, “always if you
see me forgetting you, just keep on saying ‘I’m Wendy,’ and then I’ll
remember.”

Of course this was rather unsatisfactory. However, to make amends he
showed them how to lie out flat on a strong wind that was going their
way, and this was such a pleasant change that they tried it several
times and found that they could sleep thus with security. Indeed they
would have slept longer, but Peter tired quickly of sleeping, and soon
he would cry in his captain voice, “We get off here.” So with
occasional tiffs, but on the whole rollicking, they drew near the
Neverland; for after many moons they did reach it, and, what is more,
they had been going pretty straight all the time, not perhaps so much
owing to the guidance of Peter or Tink as because the island was
looking for them. It is only thus that any one may sight those magic
shores.

“There it is,” said Peter calmly.

“Where, where?”

“Where all the arrows are pointing.”

Indeed a million golden arrows were pointing it out to the children,
all directed by their friend the sun, who wanted them to be sure of
their way before leaving them for the night.

Wendy and John and Michael stood on tip-toe in the air to get their
first sight of the island. Strange to say, they all recognized it at
once, and until fear fell upon them they hailed it, not as something
long dreamt of and seen at last, but as a familiar friend to whom they
were returning home for the holidays.

“John, there’s the lagoon.”

“Wendy, look at the turtles burying their eggs in the sand.”

“I say, John, I see your flamingo with the broken leg!”

“Look, Michael, there’s your cave!”

“John, what’s that in the brushwood?”

“It’s a wolf with her whelps. Wendy, I do believe that’s your little
whelp!”

“There’s my boat, John, with her sides stove in!”

“No, it isn’t. Why, we burned your boat.”

“That’s her, at any rate. I say, John, I see the smoke of the redskin
camp!”

“Where? Show me, and I’ll tell you by the way smoke curls whether they
are on the war-path.”

“There, just across the Mysterious River.”

“I see now. Yes, they are on the war-path right enough.”

Peter was a little annoyed with them for knowing so much, but if he
wanted to lord it over them his triumph was at hand, for have I not
told you that anon fear fell upon them?

It came as the arrows went, leaving the island in gloom.

In the old days at home the Neverland had always begun to look a little
dark and threatening by bedtime. Then unexplored patches arose in it
and spread, black shadows moved about in them, the roar of the beasts
of prey was quite different now, and above all, you lost the certainty
that you would win. You were quite glad that the night-lights were on.
You even liked Nana to say that this was just the mantelpiece over
here, and that the Neverland was all make-believe.

Of course the Neverland had been make-believe in those days, but it was
real now, and there were no night-lights, and it was getting darker
every moment, and where was Nana?

They had been flying apart, but they huddled close to Peter now. His
careless manner had gone at last, his eyes were sparkling, and a tingle
went through them every time they touched his body. They were now over
the fearsome island, flying so low that sometimes a tree grazed their
feet. Nothing horrid was visible in the air, yet their progress had
become slow and laboured, exactly as if they were pushing their way
through hostile forces. Sometimes they hung in the air until Peter had
beaten on it with his fists.

“They don’t want us to land,” he explained.

“Who are they?” Wendy whispered, shuddering.

But he could not or would not say. Tinker Bell had been asleep on his
shoulder, but now he wakened her and sent her on in front.

Sometimes he poised himself in the air, listening intently, with his
hand to his ear, and again he would stare down with eyes so bright that
they seemed to bore two holes to earth. Having done these things, he
went on again.

His courage was almost appalling. “Would you like an adventure now,” he
said casually to John, “or would you like to have your tea first?”

Wendy said “tea first” quickly, and Michael pressed her hand in
gratitude, but the braver John hesitated.

“What kind of adventure?” he asked cautiously.

“There’s a pirate asleep in the pampas just beneath us,” Peter told
him. “If you like, we’ll go down and kill him.”

“I don’t see him,” John said after a long pause.

“I do.”

“Suppose,” John said, a little huskily, “he were to wake up.”

Peter spoke indignantly. “You don’t think I would kill him while he was
sleeping! I would wake him first, and then kill him. That’s the way I
always do.”

“I say! Do you kill many?”

“Tons.”

John said “How ripping,” but decided to have tea first. He asked if
there were many pirates on the island just now, and Peter said he had
never known so many.

“Who is captain now?”

“Hook,” answered Peter, and his face became very stern as he said that
hated word.

“Jas. Hook?”

“Ay.”

Then indeed Michael began to cry, and even John could speak in gulps
only, for they knew Hook’s reputation.

“He was Blackbeard’s bo’sun,” John whispered huskily. “He is the worst
of them all. He is the only man of whom Barbecue was afraid.”

“That’s him,” said Peter.

“What is he like? Is he big?”

“He is not so big as he was.”

“How do you mean?”

“I cut off a bit of him.”

“You!”

“Yes, me,” said Peter sharply.

“I wasn’t meaning to be disrespectful.”

“Oh, all right.”

“But, I say, what bit?”

“His right hand.”

“Then he can’t fight now?”

“Oh, can’t he just!”

“Left-hander?”

“He has an iron hook instead of a right hand, and he claws with it.”

“Claws!”

“I say, John,” said Peter.

“Yes.”

“Say, ‘Ay, ay, sir.’”

“Ay, ay, sir.”

“There is one thing,” Peter continued, “that every boy who serves under
me has to promise, and so must you.”

John paled.

“It is this, if we meet Hook in open fight, you must leave him to me.”

“I promise,” John said loyally.

For the moment they were feeling less eerie, because Tink was flying
with them, and in her light they could distinguish each other.
Unfortunately she could not fly so slowly as they, and so she had to go
round and round them in a circle in which they moved as in a halo.
Wendy quite liked it, until Peter pointed out the drawbacks.

“She tells me,” he said, “that the pirates sighted us before the
darkness came, and got Long Tom out.”

“The big gun?”

“Yes. And of course they must see her light, and if they guess we are
near it they are sure to let fly.”

“Wendy!”

“John!”

“Michael!”

“Tell her to go away at once, Peter,” the three cried simultaneously,
but he refused.

“She thinks we have lost the way,” he replied stiffly, “and she is
rather frightened. You don’t think I would send her away all by herself
when she is frightened!”

For a moment the circle of light was broken, and something gave Peter a
loving little pinch.

“Then tell her,” Wendy begged, “to put out her light.”

“She can’t put it out. That is about the only thing fairies can’t do.
It just goes out of itself when she falls asleep, same as the stars.”

“Then tell her to sleep at once,” John almost ordered.

“She can’t sleep except when she’s sleepy. It is the only other thing
fairies can’t do.”

“Seems to me,” growled John, “these are the only two things worth
doing.”

Here he got a pinch, but not a loving one.

“If only one of us had a pocket,” Peter said, “we could carry her in
it.” However, they had set off in such a hurry that there was not a
pocket between the four of them.

He had a happy idea. John’s hat!

Tink agreed to travel by hat if it was carried in the hand. John
carried it, though she had hoped to be carried by Peter. Presently
Wendy took the hat, because John said it struck against his knee as he
flew; and this, as we shall see, led to mischief, for Tinker Bell hated
to be under an obligation to Wendy.

In the black topper the light was completely hidden, and they flew on
in silence. It was the stillest silence they had ever known, broken
once by a distant lapping, which Peter explained was the wild beasts
drinking at the ford, and again by a rasping sound that might have been
the branches of trees rubbing together, but he said it was the redskins
sharpening their knives.

Even these noises ceased. To Michael the loneliness was dreadful. “If
only something would make a sound!” he cried.

As if in answer to his request, the air was rent by the most tremendous
crash he had ever heard. The pirates had fired Long Tom at them.

The roar of it echoed through the mountains, and the echoes seemed to
cry savagely, “Where are they, where are they, where are they?”

Thus sharply did the terrified three learn the difference between an
island of make-believe and the same island come true.

When at last the heavens were steady again, John and Michael found
themselves alone in the darkness. John was treading the air
mechanically, and Michael without knowing how to float was floating.

“Are you shot?” John whispered tremulously.

“I haven’t tried yet,” Michael whispered back.

We know now that no one had been hit. Peter, however, had been carried
by the wind of the shot far out to sea, while Wendy was blown upwards
with no companion but Tinker Bell.

It would have been well for Wendy if at that moment she had dropped the
hat.

I don’t know whether the idea came suddenly to Tink, or whether she had
planned it on the way, but she at once popped out of the hat and began
to lure Wendy to her destruction.

Tink was not all bad; or, rather, she was all bad just now, but, on the
other hand, sometimes she was all good. Fairies have to be one thing or
the other, because being so small they unfortunately have room for one
feeling only at a time. They are, however, allowed to change, only it
must be a complete change. At present she was full of jealousy of
Wendy. What she said in her lovely tinkle Wendy could not of course
understand, and I believe some of it was bad words, but it sounded
kind, and she flew back and forward, plainly meaning “Follow me, and
all will be well.”

What else could poor Wendy do? She called to Peter and John and
Michael, and got only mocking echoes in reply. She did not yet know
that Tink hated her with the fierce hatred of a very woman. And so,
bewildered, and now staggering in her flight, she followed Tink to her
doom.




Chapter V.
THE ISLAND COME TRUE


Feeling that Peter was on his way back, the Neverland had again woke
into life. We ought to use the pluperfect and say wakened, but woke is
better and was always used by Peter.

In his absence things are usually quiet on the island. The fairies take
an hour longer in the morning, the beasts attend to their young, the
redskins feed heavily for six days and nights, and when pirates and
lost boys meet they merely bite their thumbs at each other. But with
the coming of Peter, who hates lethargy, they are under way again: if
you put your ear to the ground now, you would hear the whole island
seething with life.

On this evening the chief forces of the island were disposed as
follows. The lost boys were out looking for Peter, the pirates were out
looking for the lost boys, the redskins were out looking for the
pirates, and the beasts were out looking for the redskins. They were
going round and round the island, but they did not meet because all
were going at the same rate.

All wanted blood except the boys, who liked it as a rule, but to-night
were out to greet their captain. The boys on the island vary, of
course, in numbers, according as they get killed and so on; and when
they seem to be growing up, which is against the rules, Peter thins
them out; but at this time there were six of them, counting the twins
as two. Let us pretend to lie here among the sugar-cane and watch them
as they steal by in single file, each with his hand on his dagger.

They are forbidden by Peter to look in the least like him, and they
wear the skins of the bears slain by themselves, in which they are so
round and furry that when they fall they roll. They have therefore
become very sure-footed.

The first to pass is Tootles, not the least brave but the most
unfortunate of all that gallant band. He had been in fewer adventures
than any of them, because the big things constantly happened just when
he had stepped round the corner; all would be quiet, he would take the
opportunity of going off to gather a few sticks for firewood, and then
when he returned the others would be sweeping up the blood. This
ill-luck had given a gentle melancholy to his countenance, but instead
of souring his nature had sweetened it, so that he was quite the
humblest of the boys. Poor kind Tootles, there is danger in the air for
you to-night. Take care lest an adventure is now offered you, which, if
accepted, will plunge you in deepest woe. Tootles, the fairy Tink, who
is bent on mischief this night is looking for a tool, and she thinks
you are the most easily tricked of the boys. ’Ware Tinker Bell.

Would that he could hear us, but we are not really on the island, and
he passes by, biting his knuckles.

Next comes Nibs, the gay and debonair, followed by Slightly, who cuts
whistles out of the trees and dances ecstatically to his own tunes.
Slightly is the most conceited of the boys. He thinks he remembers the
days before he was lost, with their manners and customs, and this has
given his nose an offensive tilt. Curly is fourth; he is a pickle, and
so often has he had to deliver up his person when Peter said sternly,
“Stand forth the one who did this thing,” that now at the command he
stands forth automatically whether he has done it or not. Last come the
Twins, who cannot be described because we should be sure to be
describing the wrong one. Peter never quite knew what twins were, and
his band were not allowed to know anything he did not know, so these
two were always vague about themselves, and did their best to give
satisfaction by keeping close together in an apologetic sort of way.

The boys vanish in the gloom, and after a pause, but not a long pause,
for things go briskly on the island, come the pirates on their track.
We hear them before they are seen, and it is always the same dreadful
song:

“Avast belay, yo ho, heave to,
    A-pirating we go,
And if we’re parted by a shot
    We’re sure to meet below!”

A more villainous-looking lot never hung in a row on Execution dock.
Here, a little in advance, ever and again with his head to the ground
listening, his great arms bare, pieces of eight in his ears as
ornaments, is the handsome Italian Cecco, who cut his name in letters
of blood on the back of the governor of the prison at Gao. That
gigantic black behind him has had many names since he dropped the one
with which dusky mothers still terrify their children on the banks of
the Guadjo-mo. Here is Bill Jukes, every inch of him tattooed, the same
Bill Jukes who got six dozen on the _Walrus_ from Flint before he would
drop the bag of moidores; and Cookson, said to be Black Murphy’s
brother (but this was never proved), and Gentleman Starkey, once an
usher in a public school and still dainty in his ways of killing; and
Skylights (Morgan’s Skylights); and the Irish bo’sun Smee, an oddly
genial man who stabbed, so to speak, without offence, and was the only
Non-conformist in Hook’s crew; and Noodler, whose hands were fixed on
backwards; and Robt. Mullins and Alf Mason and many another ruffian
long known and feared on the Spanish Main.

In the midst of them, the blackest and largest in that dark setting,
reclined James Hook, or as he wrote himself, Jas. Hook, of whom it is
said he was the only man that the Sea-Cook feared. He lay at his ease
in a rough chariot drawn and propelled by his men, and instead of a
right hand he had the iron hook with which ever and anon he encouraged
them to increase their pace. As dogs this terrible man treated and
addressed them, and as dogs they obeyed him. In person he was
cadaverous and blackavized, and his hair was dressed in long curls,
which at a little distance looked like black candles, and gave a
singularly threatening expression to his handsome countenance. His eyes
were of the blue of the forget-me-not, and of a profound melancholy,
save when he was plunging his hook into you, at which time two red
spots appeared in them and lit them up horribly. In manner, something
of the grand seigneur still clung to him, so that he even ripped you up
with an air, and I have been told that he was a _raconteur_ of repute.
He was never more sinister than when he was most polite, which is
probably the truest test of breeding; and the elegance of his diction,
even when he was swearing, no less than the distinction of his
demeanour, showed him one of a different cast from his crew. A man of
indomitable courage, it was said that the only thing he shied at was
the sight of his own blood, which was thick and of an unusual colour.
In dress he somewhat aped the attire associated with the name of
Charles II, having heard it said in some earlier period of his career
that he bore a strange resemblance to the ill-fated Stuarts; and in his
mouth he had a holder of his own contrivance which enabled him to smoke
two cigars at once. But undoubtedly the grimmest part of him was his
iron claw.

Let us now kill a pirate, to show Hook’s method. Skylights will do. As
they pass, Skylights lurches clumsily against him, ruffling his lace
collar; the hook shoots forth, there is a tearing sound and one
screech, then the body is kicked aside, and the pirates pass on. He has
not even taken the cigars from his mouth.

Such is the terrible man against whom Peter Pan is pitted. Which will
win?

On the trail of the pirates, stealing noiselessly down the war-path,
which is not visible to inexperienced eyes, come the redskins, every
one of them with his eyes peeled. They carry tomahawks and knives, and
their naked bodies gleam with paint and oil. Strung around them are
scalps, of boys as well as of pirates, for these are the Piccaninny
tribe, and not to be confused with the softer-hearted Delawares or the
Hurons. In the van, on all fours, is Great Big Little Panther, a brave
of so many scalps that in his present position they somewhat impede his
progress. Bringing up the rear, the place of greatest danger, comes
Tiger Lily, proudly erect, a princess in her own right. She is the most
beautiful of dusky Dianas and the belle of the Piccaninnies,
coquettish, cold and amorous by turns; there is not a brave who would
not have the wayward thing to wife, but she staves off the altar with a
hatchet. Observe how they pass over fallen twigs without making the
slightest noise. The only sound to be heard is their somewhat heavy
breathing. The fact is that they are all a little fat just now after
the heavy gorging, but in time they will work this off. For the moment,
however, it constitutes their chief danger.

The redskins disappear as they have come like shadows, and soon their
place is taken by the beasts, a great and motley procession: lions,
tigers, bears, and the innumerable smaller savage things that flee from
them, for every kind of beast, and, more particularly, all the
man-eaters, live cheek by jowl on the favoured island. Their tongues
are hanging out, they are hungry to-night.

When they have passed, comes the last figure of all, a gigantic
crocodile. We shall see for whom she is looking presently.

The crocodile passes, but soon the boys appear again, for the
procession must continue indefinitely until one of the parties stops or
changes its pace. Then quickly they will be on top of each other.

All are keeping a sharp look-out in front, but none suspects that the
danger may be creeping up from behind. This shows how real the island
was.

The first to fall out of the moving circle was the boys. They flung
themselves down on the sward, close to their underground home.

“I do wish Peter would come back,” every one of them said nervously,
though in height and still more in breadth they were all larger than
their captain.

“I am the only one who is not afraid of the pirates,” Slightly said, in
the tone that prevented his being a general favourite; but perhaps some
distant sound disturbed him, for he added hastily, “but I wish he would
come back, and tell us whether he has heard anything more about
Cinderella.”

They talked of Cinderella, and Tootles was confident that his mother
must have been very like her.

It was only in Peter’s absence that they could speak of mothers, the
subject being forbidden by him as silly.

“All I remember about my mother,” Nibs told them, “is that she often
said to my father, ‘Oh, how I wish I had a cheque-book of my own!’ I
don’t know what a cheque-book is, but I should just love to give my
mother one.”

While they talked they heard a distant sound. You or I, not being wild
things of the woods, would have heard nothing, but they heard it, and
it was the grim song:

“Yo ho, yo ho, the pirate life,
    The flag o’ skull and bones,
A merry hour, a hempen rope,
    And hey for Davy Jones.”

At once the lost boys—but where are they? They are no longer there.
Rabbits could not have disappeared more quickly.

I will tell you where they are. With the exception of Nibs, who has
darted away to reconnoitre, they are already in their home under the
ground, a very delightful residence of which we shall see a good deal
presently. But how have they reached it? for there is no entrance to be
seen, not so much as a large stone, which if rolled away, would
disclose the mouth of a cave. Look closely, however, and you may note
that there are here seven large trees, each with a hole in its hollow
trunk as large as a boy. These are the seven entrances to the home
under the ground, for which Hook has been searching in vain these many
moons. Will he find it tonight?

As the pirates advanced, the quick eye of Starkey sighted Nibs
disappearing through the wood, and at once his pistol flashed out. But
an iron claw gripped his shoulder.

“Captain, let go!” he cried, writhing.

Now for the first time we hear the voice of Hook. It was a black voice.
“Put back that pistol first,” it said threateningly.

“It was one of those boys you hate. I could have shot him dead.”

“Ay, and the sound would have brought Tiger Lily’s redskins upon us. Do
you want to lose your scalp?”

“Shall I after him, Captain,” asked pathetic Smee, “and tickle him with
Johnny Corkscrew?” Smee had pleasant names for everything, and his
cutlass was Johnny Corkscrew, because he wiggled it in the wound. One
could mention many lovable traits in Smee. For instance, after killing,
it was his spectacles he wiped instead of his weapon.

“Johnny’s a silent fellow,” he reminded Hook.

“Not now, Smee,” Hook said darkly. “He is only one, and I want to
mischief all the seven. Scatter and look for them.”

The pirates disappeared among the trees, and in a moment their Captain
and Smee were alone. Hook heaved a heavy sigh, and I know not why it
was, perhaps it was because of the soft beauty of the evening, but
there came over him a desire to confide to his faithful bo’sun the
story of his life. He spoke long and earnestly, but what it was all
about Smee, who was rather stupid, did not know in the least.

Anon he caught the word Peter.

“Most of all,” Hook was saying passionately, “I want their captain,
Peter Pan. ’Twas he cut off my arm.” He brandished the hook
threateningly. “I’ve waited long to shake his hand with this. Oh, I’ll
tear him!”

“And yet,” said Smee, “I have often heard you say that hook was worth a
score of hands, for combing the hair and other homely uses.”

“Ay,” the captain answered, “if I was a mother I would pray to have my
children born with this instead of that,” and he cast a look of pride
upon his iron hand and one of scorn upon the other. Then again he
frowned.

“Peter flung my arm,” he said, wincing, “to a crocodile that happened
to be passing by.”

“I have often,” said Smee, “noticed your strange dread of crocodiles.”

“Not of crocodiles,” Hook corrected him, “but of that one crocodile.”
He lowered his voice. “It liked my arm so much, Smee, that it has
followed me ever since, from sea to sea and from land to land, licking
its lips for the rest of me.”

“In a way,” said Smee, “it’s sort of a compliment.”

“I want no such compliments,” Hook barked petulantly. “I want Peter
Pan, who first gave the brute its taste for me.”

He sat down on a large mushroom, and now there was a quiver in his
voice. “Smee,” he said huskily, “that crocodile would have had me
before this, but by a lucky chance it swallowed a clock which goes tick
tick inside it, and so before it can reach me I hear the tick and
bolt.” He laughed, but in a hollow way.

“Some day,” said Smee, “the clock will run down, and then he’ll get
you.”

Hook wetted his dry lips. “Ay,” he said, “that’s the fear that haunts
me.”

Since sitting down he had felt curiously warm. “Smee,” he said, “this
seat is hot.” He jumped up. “Odds bobs, hammer and tongs I’m burning.”

They examined the mushroom, which was of a size and solidity unknown on
the mainland; they tried to pull it up, and it came away at once in
their hands, for it had no root. Stranger still, smoke began at once to
ascend. The pirates looked at each other. “A chimney!” they both
exclaimed.

They had indeed discovered the chimney of the home under the ground. It
was the custom of the boys to stop it with a mushroom when enemies were
in the neighbourhood.

Not only smoke came out of it. There came also children’s voices, for
so safe did the boys feel in their hiding-place that they were gaily
chattering. The pirates listened grimly, and then replaced the
mushroom. They looked around them and noted the holes in the seven
trees.

“Did you hear them say Peter Pan’s from home?” Smee whispered,
fidgeting with Johnny Corkscrew.

Hook nodded. He stood for a long time lost in thought, and at last a
curdling smile lit up his swarthy face. Smee had been waiting for it.
“Unrip your plan, captain,” he cried eagerly.

“To return to the ship,” Hook replied slowly through his teeth, “and
cook a large rich cake of a jolly thickness with green sugar on it.
There can be but one room below, for there is but one chimney. The
silly moles had not the sense to see that they did not need a door
apiece. That shows they have no mother. We will leave the cake on the
shore of the Mermaids’ Lagoon. These boys are always swimming about
there, playing with the mermaids. They will find the cake and they will
gobble it up, because, having no mother, they don’t know how dangerous
’tis to eat rich damp cake.” He burst into laughter, not hollow
laughter now, but honest laughter. “Aha, they will die.”

Smee had listened with growing admiration.

“It’s the wickedest, prettiest policy ever I heard of!” he cried, and
in their exultation they danced and sang:

“Avast, belay, when I appear,
    By fear they’re overtook;
Nought’s left upon your bones when you
    Have shaken claws with Hook.”

They began the verse, but they never finished it, for another sound
broke in and stilled them. There was at first such a tiny sound that a
leaf might have fallen on it and smothered it, but as it came nearer it
was more distinct.

Tick tick tick tick!

Hook stood shuddering, one foot in the air.

“The crocodile!” he gasped, and bounded away, followed by his bo’sun.

It was indeed the crocodile. It had passed the redskins, who were now
on the trail of the other pirates. It oozed on after Hook.

Once more the boys emerged into the open; but the dangers of the night
were not yet over, for presently Nibs rushed breathless into their
midst, pursued by a pack of wolves. The tongues of the pursuers were
hanging out; the baying of them was horrible.

“Save me, save me!” cried Nibs, falling on the ground.

“But what can we do, what can we do?”

It was a high compliment to Peter that at that dire moment their
thoughts turned to him.

“What would Peter do?” they cried simultaneously.

Almost in the same breath they cried, “Peter would look at them through
his legs.”

And then, “Let us do what Peter would do.”

It is quite the most successful way of defying wolves, and as one boy
they bent and looked through their legs. The next moment is the long
one, but victory came quickly, for as the boys advanced upon them in
the terrible attitude, the wolves dropped their tails and fled.

Now Nibs rose from the ground, and the others thought that his staring
eyes still saw the wolves. But it was not wolves he saw.

“I have seen a wonderfuller thing,” he cried, as they gathered round
him eagerly. “A great white bird. It is flying this way.”

“What kind of a bird, do you think?”

“I don’t know,” Nibs said, awestruck, “but it looks so weary, and as it
flies it moans, ‘Poor Wendy.’”

“Poor Wendy?”

“I remember,” said Slightly instantly, “there are birds called
Wendies.”

“See, it comes!” cried Curly, pointing to Wendy in the heavens.

Wendy was now almost overhead, and they could hear her plaintive cry.
But more distinct came the shrill voice of Tinker Bell. The jealous
fairy had now cast off all disguise of friendship, and was darting at
her victim from every direction, pinching savagely each time she
touched.

“Hullo, Tink,” cried the wondering boys.

Tink’s reply rang out: “Peter wants you to shoot the Wendy.”

It was not in their nature to question when Peter ordered. “Let us do
what Peter wishes!” cried the simple boys. “Quick, bows and arrows!”

All but Tootles popped down their trees. He had a bow and arrow with
him, and Tink noted it, and rubbed her little hands.

“Quick, Tootles, quick,” she screamed. “Peter will be so pleased.”

Tootles excitedly fitted the arrow to his bow. “Out of the way, Tink,”
he shouted, and then he fired, and Wendy fluttered to the ground with
an arrow in her breast.




Chapter VI.
THE LITTLE HOUSE


Foolish Tootles was standing like a conqueror over Wendy’s body when
the other boys sprang, armed, from their trees.

“You are too late,” he cried proudly, “I have shot the Wendy. Peter
will be so pleased with me.”

Overhead Tinker Bell shouted “Silly ass!” and darted into hiding. The
others did not hear her. They had crowded round Wendy, and as they
looked a terrible silence fell upon the wood. If Wendy’s heart had been
beating they would all have heard it.

Slightly was the first to speak. “This is no bird,” he said in a scared
voice. “I think this must be a lady.”

“A lady?” said Tootles, and fell a-trembling.

“And we have killed her,” Nibs said hoarsely.

They all whipped off their caps.

“Now I see,” Curly said: “Peter was bringing her to us.” He threw
himself sorrowfully on the ground.

“A lady to take care of us at last,” said one of the twins, “and you
have killed her!”

They were sorry for him, but sorrier for themselves, and when he took a
step nearer them they turned from him.

Tootles’ face was very white, but there was a dignity about him now
that had never been there before.

“I did it,” he said, reflecting. “When ladies used to come to me in
dreams, I said, ‘Pretty mother, pretty mother.’ But when at last she
really came, I shot her.”

He moved slowly away.

“Don’t go,” they called in pity.

“I must,” he answered, shaking; “I am so afraid of Peter.”

It was at this tragic moment that they heard a sound which made the
heart of every one of them rise to his mouth. They heard Peter crow.

“Peter!” they cried, for it was always thus that he signalled his
return.

“Hide her,” they whispered, and gathered hastily around Wendy. But
Tootles stood aloof.

Again came that ringing crow, and Peter dropped in front of them.
“Greetings, boys,” he cried, and mechanically they saluted, and then
again was silence.

He frowned.

“I am back,” he said hotly, “why do you not cheer?”

They opened their mouths, but the cheers would not come. He overlooked
it in his haste to tell the glorious tidings.

“Great news, boys,” he cried, “I have brought at last a mother for you
all.”

Still no sound, except a little thud from Tootles as he dropped on his
knees.

“Have you not seen her?” asked Peter, becoming troubled. “She flew this
way.”

“Ah me!” one voice said, and another said, “Oh, mournful day.”

Tootles rose. “Peter,” he said quietly, “I will show her to you,” and
when the others would still have hidden her he said, “Back, twins, let
Peter see.”

So they all stood back, and let him see, and after he had looked for a
little time he did not know what to do next.

“She is dead,” he said uncomfortably. “Perhaps she is frightened at
being dead.”

He thought of hopping off in a comic sort of way till he was out of
sight of her, and then never going near the spot any more. They would
all have been glad to follow if he had done this.

But there was the arrow. He took it from her heart and faced his band.

“Whose arrow?” he demanded sternly.

“Mine, Peter,” said Tootles on his knees.

“Oh, dastard hand,” Peter said, and he raised the arrow to use it as a
dagger.

Tootles did not flinch. He bared his breast. “Strike, Peter,” he said
firmly, “strike true.”

Twice did Peter raise the arrow, and twice did his hand fall. “I cannot
strike,” he said with awe, “there is something stays my hand.”

All looked at him in wonder, save Nibs, who fortunately looked at
Wendy.

“It is she,” he cried, “the Wendy lady, see, her arm!”

Wonderful to relate, Wendy had raised her arm. Nibs bent over her and
listened reverently. “I think she said, ‘Poor Tootles,’” he whispered.

“She lives,” Peter said briefly.

Slightly cried instantly, “The Wendy lady lives.”

Then Peter knelt beside her and found his button. You remember she had
put it on a chain that she wore round her neck.

“See,” he said, “the arrow struck against this. It is the kiss I gave
her. It has saved her life.”

“I remember kisses,” Slightly interposed quickly, “let me see it. Ay,
that’s a kiss.”

Peter did not hear him. He was begging Wendy to get better quickly, so
that he could show her the mermaids. Of course she could not answer
yet, being still in a frightful faint; but from overhead came a wailing
note.

“Listen to Tink,” said Curly, “she is crying because the Wendy lives.”

Then they had to tell Peter of Tink’s crime, and almost never had they
seen him look so stern.

“Listen, Tinker Bell,” he cried, “I am your friend no more. Begone from
me for ever.”

She flew on to his shoulder and pleaded, but he brushed her off. Not
until Wendy again raised her arm did he relent sufficiently to say,
“Well, not for ever, but for a whole week.”

Do you think Tinker Bell was grateful to Wendy for raising her arm? Oh
dear no, never wanted to pinch her so much. Fairies indeed are strange,
and Peter, who understood them best, often cuffed them.

But what to do with Wendy in her present delicate state of health?

“Let us carry her down into the house,” Curly suggested.

“Ay,” said Slightly, “that is what one does with ladies.”

“No, no,” Peter said, “you must not touch her. It would not be
sufficiently respectful.”

“That,” said Slightly, “is what I was thinking.”

“But if she lies there,” Tootles said, “she will die.”

“Ay, she will die,” Slightly admitted, “but there is no way out.”

“Yes, there is,” cried Peter. “Let us build a little house round her.”

They were all delighted. “Quick,” he ordered them, “bring me each of
you the best of what we have. Gut our house. Be sharp.”

In a moment they were as busy as tailors the night before a wedding.
They skurried this way and that, down for bedding, up for firewood, and
while they were at it, who should appear but John and Michael. As they
dragged along the ground they fell asleep standing, stopped, woke up,
moved another step and slept again.

“John, John,” Michael would cry, “wake up! Where is Nana, John, and
mother?”

And then John would rub his eyes and mutter, “It is true, we did fly.”

You may be sure they were very relieved to find Peter.

“Hullo, Peter,” they said.

“Hullo,” replied Peter amicably, though he had quite forgotten them. He
was very busy at the moment measuring Wendy with his feet to see how
large a house she would need. Of course he meant to leave room for
chairs and a table. John and Michael watched him.

“Is Wendy asleep?” they asked.

“Yes.”

“John,” Michael proposed, “let us wake her and get her to make supper
for us,” but as he said it some of the other boys rushed on carrying
branches for the building of the house. “Look at them!” he cried.

“Curly,” said Peter in his most captainy voice, “see that these boys
help in the building of the house.”

“Ay, ay, sir.”

“Build a house?” exclaimed John.

“For the Wendy,” said Curly.

“For Wendy?” John said, aghast. “Why, she is only a girl!”

“That,” explained Curly, “is why we are her servants.”

“You? Wendy’s servants!”

“Yes,” said Peter, “and you also. Away with them.”

The astounded brothers were dragged away to hack and hew and carry.
“Chairs and a fender first,” Peter ordered. “Then we shall build a
house round them.”

“Ay,” said Slightly, “that is how a house is built; it all comes back
to me.”

Peter thought of everything. “Slightly,” he cried, “fetch a doctor.”

“Ay, ay,” said Slightly at once, and disappeared, scratching his head.
But he knew Peter must be obeyed, and he returned in a moment, wearing
John’s hat and looking solemn.

“Please, sir,” said Peter, going to him, “are you a doctor?”

The difference between him and the other boys at such a time was that
they knew it was make-believe, while to him make-believe and true were
exactly the same thing. This sometimes troubled them, as when they had
to make-believe that they had had their dinners.

If they broke down in their make-believe he rapped them on the
knuckles.

“Yes, my little man,” Slightly anxiously replied, who had chapped
knuckles.

“Please, sir,” Peter explained, “a lady lies very ill.”

She was lying at their feet, but Slightly had the sense not to see her.

“Tut, tut, tut,” he said, “where does she lie?”

“In yonder glade.”

“I will put a glass thing in her mouth,” said Slightly, and he
made-believe to do it, while Peter waited. It was an anxious moment
when the glass thing was withdrawn.

“How is she?” inquired Peter.

“Tut, tut, tut,” said Slightly, “this has cured her.”

“I am glad!” Peter cried.

“I will call again in the evening,” Slightly said; “give her beef tea
out of a cup with a spout to it;” but after he had returned the hat to
John he blew big breaths, which was his habit on escaping from a
difficulty.

In the meantime the wood had been alive with the sound of axes; almost
everything needed for a cosy dwelling already lay at Wendy’s feet.

“If only we knew,” said one, “the kind of house she likes best.”

“Peter,” shouted another, “she is moving in her sleep.”

“Her mouth opens,” cried a third, looking respectfully into it. “Oh,
lovely!”

“Perhaps she is going to sing in her sleep,” said Peter. “Wendy, sing
the kind of house you would like to have.”

Immediately, without opening her eyes, Wendy began to sing:

“I wish I had a pretty house,
    The littlest ever seen,
With funny little red walls
    And roof of mossy green.”

They gurgled with joy at this, for by the greatest good luck the
branches they had brought were sticky with red sap, and all the ground
was carpeted with moss. As they rattled up the little house they broke
into song themselves:

“We’ve built the little walls and roof
    And made a lovely door,
So tell us, mother Wendy,
    What are you wanting more?”

To this she answered greedily:

“Oh, really next I think I’ll have
    Gay windows all about,
With roses peeping in, you know,
    And babies peeping out.”

With a blow of their fists they made windows, and large yellow leaves
were the blinds. But roses—?

“Roses,” cried Peter sternly.

Quickly they made-believe to grow the loveliest roses up the walls.

Babies?

To prevent Peter ordering babies they hurried into song again:

“We’ve made the roses peeping out,
    The babes are at the door,
We cannot make ourselves, you know,
    ’Cos we’ve been made before.”

Peter, seeing this to be a good idea, at once pretended that it was his
own. The house was quite beautiful, and no doubt Wendy was very cosy
within, though, of course, they could no longer see her. Peter strode
up and down, ordering finishing touches. Nothing escaped his eagle
eyes. Just when it seemed absolutely finished:

“There’s no knocker on the door,” he said.

They were very ashamed, but Tootles gave the sole of his shoe, and it
made an excellent knocker.

Absolutely finished now, they thought.

Not of bit of it. “There’s no chimney,” Peter said; “we must have a
chimney.”

“It certainly does need a chimney,” said John importantly. This gave
Peter an idea. He snatched the hat off John’s head, knocked out the
bottom, and put the hat on the roof. The little house was so pleased to
have such a capital chimney that, as if to say thank you, smoke
immediately began to come out of the hat.

Now really and truly it was finished. Nothing remained to do but to
knock.

“All look your best,” Peter warned them; “first impressions are awfully
important.”

He was glad no one asked him what first impressions are; they were all
too busy looking their best.

He knocked politely, and now the wood was as still as the children, not
a sound to be heard except from Tinker Bell, who was watching from a
branch and openly sneering.

What the boys were wondering was, would any one answer the knock? If a
lady, what would she be like?

The door opened and a lady came out. It was Wendy. They all whipped off
their hats.

She looked properly surprised, and this was just how they had hoped she
would look.

“Where am I?” she said.

Of course Slightly was the first to get his word in. “Wendy lady,” he
said rapidly, “for you we built this house.”

“Oh, say you’re pleased,” cried Nibs.

“Lovely, darling house,” Wendy said, and they were the very words they
had hoped she would say.

“And we are your children,” cried the twins.

Then all went on their knees, and holding out their arms cried, “O
Wendy lady, be our mother.”

“Ought I?” Wendy said, all shining. “Of course it’s frightfully
fascinating, but you see I am only a little girl. I have no real
experience.”

“That doesn’t matter,” said Peter, as if he were the only person
present who knew all about it, though he was really the one who knew
least. “What we need is just a nice motherly person.”

“Oh dear!” Wendy said, “you see, I feel that is exactly what I am.”

“It is, it is,” they all cried; “we saw it at once.”

“Very well,” she said, “I will do my best. Come inside at once, you
naughty children; I am sure your feet are damp. And before I put you to
bed I have just time to finish the story of Cinderella.”

In they went; I don’t know how there was room for them, but you can
squeeze very tight in the Neverland. And that was the first of the many
joyous evenings they had with Wendy. By and by she tucked them up in
the great bed in the home under the trees, but she herself slept that
night in the little house, and Peter kept watch outside with drawn
sword, for the pirates could be heard carousing far away and the wolves
were on the prowl. The little house looked so cosy and safe in the
darkness, with a bright light showing through its blinds, and the
chimney smoking beautifully, and Peter standing on guard. After a time
he fell asleep, and some unsteady fairies had to climb over him on
their way home from an orgy. Any of the other boys obstructing the
fairy path at night they would have mischiefed, but they just tweaked
Peter’s nose and passed on.




Chapter VII.
THE HOME UNDER THE GROUND


One of the first things Peter did next day was to measure Wendy and
John and Michael for hollow trees. Hook, you remember, had sneered at
the boys for thinking they needed a tree apiece, but this was
ignorance, for unless your tree fitted you it was difficult to go up
and down, and no two of the boys were quite the same size. Once you
fitted, you drew in your breath at the top, and down you went at
exactly the right speed, while to ascend you drew in and let out
alternately, and so wriggled up. Of course, when you have mastered the
action you are able to do these things without thinking of them, and
nothing can be more graceful.

But you simply must fit, and Peter measures you for your tree as
carefully as for a suit of clothes: the only difference being that the
clothes are made to fit you, while you have to be made to fit the tree.
Usually it is done quite easily, as by your wearing too many garments
or too few, but if you are bumpy in awkward places or the only
available tree is an odd shape, Peter does some things to you, and
after that you fit. Once you fit, great care must be taken to go on
fitting, and this, as Wendy was to discover to her delight, keeps a
whole family in perfect condition.

Wendy and Michael fitted their trees at the first try, but John had to
be altered a little.

After a few days’ practice they could go up and down as gaily as
buckets in a well. And how ardently they grew to love their home under
the ground; especially Wendy. It consisted of one large room, as all
houses should do, with a floor in which you could dig if you wanted to
go fishing, and in this floor grew stout mushrooms of a charming
colour, which were used as stools. A Never tree tried hard to grow in
the centre of the room, but every morning they sawed the trunk through,
level with the floor. By tea-time it was always about two feet high,
and then they put a door on top of it, the whole thus becoming a table;
as soon as they cleared away, they sawed off the trunk again, and thus
there was more room to play. There was an enormous fireplace which was
in almost any part of the room where you cared to light it, and across
this Wendy stretched strings, made of fibre, from which she suspended
her washing. The bed was tilted against the wall by day, and let down
at 6:30, when it filled nearly half the room; and all the boys slept in
it, except Michael, lying like sardines in a tin. There was a strict
rule against turning round until one gave the signal, when all turned
at once. Michael should have used it also, but Wendy would have a baby,
and he was the littlest, and you know what women are, and the short and
long of it is that he was hung up in a basket.

It was rough and simple, and not unlike what baby bears would have made
of an underground house in the same circumstances. But there was one
recess in the wall, no larger than a bird-cage, which was the private
apartment of Tinker Bell. It could be shut off from the rest of the
house by a tiny curtain, which Tink, who was most fastidious, always
kept drawn when dressing or undressing. No woman, however large, could
have had a more exquisite boudoir and bed-chamber combined. The couch,
as she always called it, was a genuine Queen Mab, with club legs; and
she varied the bedspreads according to what fruit-blossom was in
season. Her mirror was a Puss-in-Boots, of which there are now only
three, unchipped, known to fairy dealers; the washstand was Pie-crust
and reversible, the chest of drawers an authentic Charming the Sixth,
and the carpet and rugs the best (the early) period of Margery and
Robin. There was a chandelier from Tiddlywinks for the look of the
thing, but of course she lit the residence herself. Tink was very
contemptuous of the rest of the house, as indeed was perhaps
inevitable, and her chamber, though beautiful, looked rather conceited,
having the appearance of a nose permanently turned up.

I suppose it was all especially entrancing to Wendy, because those
rampagious boys of hers gave her so much to do. Really there were whole
weeks when, except perhaps with a stocking in the evening, she was
never above ground. The cooking, I can tell you, kept her nose to the
pot, and even if there was nothing in it, even if there was no pot, she
had to keep watching that it came aboil just the same. You never
exactly knew whether there would be a real meal or just a make-believe,
it all depended upon Peter’s whim: he could eat, really eat, if it was
part of a game, but he could not stodge just to feel stodgy, which is
what most children like better than anything else; the next best thing
being to talk about it. Make-believe was so real to him that during a
meal of it you could see him getting rounder. Of course it was trying,
but you simply had to follow his lead, and if you could prove to him
that you were getting loose for your tree he let you stodge.

Wendy’s favourite time for sewing and darning was after they had all
gone to bed. Then, as she expressed it, she had a breathing time for
herself; and she occupied it in making new things for them, and putting
double pieces on the knees, for they were all most frightfully hard on
their knees.

When she sat down to a basketful of their stockings, every heel with a
hole in it, she would fling up her arms and exclaim, “Oh dear, I am
sure I sometimes think spinsters are to be envied!”

Her face beamed when she exclaimed this.

You remember about her pet wolf. Well, it very soon discovered that she
had come to the island and it found her out, and they just ran into
each other’s arms. After that it followed her about everywhere.

As time wore on did she think much about the beloved parents she had
left behind her? This is a difficult question, because it is quite
impossible to say how time does wear on in the Neverland, where it is
calculated by moons and suns, and there are ever so many more of them
than on the mainland. But I am afraid that Wendy did not really worry
about her father and mother; she was absolutely confident that they
would always keep the window open for her to fly back by, and this gave
her complete ease of mind. What did disturb her at times was that John
remembered his parents vaguely only, as people he had once known, while
Michael was quite willing to believe that she was really his mother.
These things scared her a little, and nobly anxious to do her duty, she
tried to fix the old life in their minds by setting them examination
papers on it, as like as possible to the ones she used to do at school.
The other boys thought this awfully interesting, and insisted on
joining, and they made slates for themselves, and sat round the table,
writing and thinking hard about the questions she had written on
another slate and passed round. They were the most ordinary
questions—“What was the colour of Mother’s eyes? Which was taller,
Father or Mother? Was Mother blonde or brunette? Answer all three
questions if possible.” “(A) Write an essay of not less than 40 words
on How I spent my last Holidays, or The Characters of Father and Mother
compared. Only one of these to be attempted.” Or “(1) Describe Mother’s
laugh; (2) Describe Father’s laugh; (3) Describe Mother’s Party Dress;
(4) Describe the Kennel and its Inmate.”

They were just everyday questions like these, and when you could not
answer them you were told to make a cross; and it was really dreadful
what a number of crosses even John made. Of course the only boy who
replied to every question was Slightly, and no one could have been more
hopeful of coming out first, but his answers were perfectly ridiculous,
and he really came out last: a melancholy thing.

Peter did not compete. For one thing he despised all mothers except
Wendy, and for another he was the only boy on the island who could
neither write nor spell; not the smallest word. He was above all that
sort of thing.

By the way, the questions were all written in the past tense. What was
the colour of Mother’s eyes, and so on. Wendy, you see, had been
forgetting, too.

Adventures, of course, as we shall see, were of daily occurrence; but
about this time Peter invented, with Wendy’s help, a new game that
fascinated him enormously, until he suddenly had no more interest in
it, which, as you have been told, was what always happened with his
games. It consisted in pretending not to have adventures, in doing the
sort of thing John and Michael had been doing all their lives, sitting
on stools flinging balls in the air, pushing each other, going out for
walks and coming back without having killed so much as a grizzly. To
see Peter doing nothing on a stool was a great sight; he could not help
looking solemn at such times, to sit still seemed to him such a comic
thing to do. He boasted that he had gone walking for the good of his
health. For several suns these were the most novel of all adventures to
him; and John and Michael had to pretend to be delighted also;
otherwise he would have treated them severely.

He often went out alone, and when he came back you were never
absolutely certain whether he had had an adventure or not. He might
have forgotten it so completely that he said nothing about it; and then
when you went out you found the body; and, on the other hand, he might
say a great deal about it, and yet you could not find the body.
Sometimes he came home with his head bandaged, and then Wendy cooed
over him and bathed it in lukewarm water, while he told a dazzling
tale. But she was never quite sure, you know. There were, however, many
adventures which she knew to be true because she was in them herself,
and there were still more that were at least partly true, for the other
boys were in them and said they were wholly true. To describe them all
would require a book as large as an English-Latin, Latin-English
Dictionary, and the most we can do is to give one as a specimen of an
average hour on the island. The difficulty is which one to choose.
Should we take the brush with the redskins at Slightly Gulch? It was a
sanguinary affair, and especially interesting as showing one of Peter’s
peculiarities, which was that in the middle of a fight he would
suddenly change sides. At the Gulch, when victory was still in the
balance, sometimes leaning this way and sometimes that, he called out,
“I’m redskin to-day; what are you, Tootles?” And Tootles answered,
“Redskin; what are you, Nibs?” and Nibs said, “Redskin; what are you
Twin?” and so on; and they were all redskins; and of course this would
have ended the fight had not the real redskins fascinated by Peter’s
methods, agreed to be lost boys for that once, and so at it they all
went again, more fiercely than ever.

The extraordinary upshot of this adventure was—but we have not decided
yet that this is the adventure we are to narrate. Perhaps a better one
would be the night attack by the redskins on the house under the
ground, when several of them stuck in the hollow trees and had to be
pulled out like corks. Or we might tell how Peter saved Tiger Lily’s
life in the Mermaids’ Lagoon, and so made her his ally.

Or we could tell of that cake the pirates cooked so that the boys might
eat it and perish; and how they placed it in one cunning spot after
another; but always Wendy snatched it from the hands of her children,
so that in time it lost its succulence, and became as hard as a stone,
and was used as a missile, and Hook fell over it in the dark.

Or suppose we tell of the birds that were Peter’s friends, particularly
of the Never bird that built in a tree overhanging the lagoon, and how
the nest fell into the water, and still the bird sat on her eggs, and
Peter gave orders that she was not to be disturbed. That is a pretty
story, and the end shows how grateful a bird can be; but if we tell it
we must also tell the whole adventure of the lagoon, which would of
course be telling two adventures rather than just one. A shorter
adventure, and quite as exciting, was Tinker Bell’s attempt, with the
help of some street fairies, to have the sleeping Wendy conveyed on a
great floating leaf to the mainland. Fortunately the leaf gave way and
Wendy woke, thinking it was bath-time, and swam back. Or again, we
might choose Peter’s defiance of the lions, when he drew a circle round
him on the ground with an arrow and dared them to cross it; and though
he waited for hours, with the other boys and Wendy looking on
breathlessly from trees, not one of them dared to accept his challenge.

Which of these adventures shall we choose? The best way will be to toss
for it.

I have tossed, and the lagoon has won. This almost makes one wish that
the gulch or the cake or Tink’s leaf had won. Of course I could do it
again, and make it best out of three; however, perhaps fairest to stick
to the lagoon.




Chapter VIII.
THE MERMAIDS’ LAGOON


If you shut your eyes and are a lucky one, you may see at times a
shapeless pool of lovely pale colours suspended in the darkness; then
if you squeeze your eyes tighter, the pool begins to take shape, and
the colours become so vivid that with another squeeze they must go on
fire. But just before they go on fire you see the lagoon. This is the
nearest you ever get to it on the mainland, just one heavenly moment;
if there could be two moments you might see the surf and hear the
mermaids singing.

The children often spent long summer days on this lagoon, swimming or
floating most of the time, playing the mermaid games in the water, and
so forth. You must not think from this that the mermaids were on
friendly terms with them: on the contrary, it was among Wendy’s lasting
regrets that all the time she was on the island she never had a civil
word from one of them. When she stole softly to the edge of the lagoon
she might see them by the score, especially on Marooners’ Rock, where
they loved to bask, combing out their hair in a lazy way that quite
irritated her; or she might even swim, on tiptoe as it were, to within
a yard of them, but then they saw her and dived, probably splashing her
with their tails, not by accident, but intentionally.

They treated all the boys in the same way, except of course Peter, who
chatted with them on Marooners’ Rock by the hour, and sat on their
tails when they got cheeky. He gave Wendy one of their combs.

The most haunting time at which to see them is at the turn of the moon,
when they utter strange wailing cries; but the lagoon is dangerous for
mortals then, and until the evening of which we have now to tell, Wendy
had never seen the lagoon by moonlight, less from fear, for of course
Peter would have accompanied her, than because she had strict rules
about every one being in bed by seven. She was often at the lagoon,
however, on sunny days after rain, when the mermaids come up in
extraordinary numbers to play with their bubbles. The bubbles of many
colours made in rainbow water they treat as balls, hitting them gaily
from one to another with their tails, and trying to keep them in the
rainbow till they burst. The goals are at each end of the rainbow, and
the keepers only are allowed to use their hands. Sometimes a dozen of
these games will be going on in the lagoon at a time, and it is quite a
pretty sight.

But the moment the children tried to join in they had to play by
themselves, for the mermaids immediately disappeared. Nevertheless we
have proof that they secretly watched the interlopers, and were not
above taking an idea from them; for John introduced a new way of
hitting the bubble, with the head instead of the hand, and the mermaids
adopted it. This is the one mark that John has left on the Neverland.

It must also have been rather pretty to see the children resting on a
rock for half an hour after their mid-day meal. Wendy insisted on their
doing this, and it had to be a real rest even though the meal was
make-believe. So they lay there in the sun, and their bodies glistened
in it, while she sat beside them and looked important.

It was one such day, and they were all on Marooners’ Rock. The rock was
not much larger than their great bed, but of course they all knew how
not to take up much room, and they were dozing, or at least lying with
their eyes shut, and pinching occasionally when they thought Wendy was
not looking. She was very busy, stitching.

While she stitched a change came to the lagoon. Little shivers ran over
it, and the sun went away and shadows stole across the water, turning
it cold. Wendy could no longer see to thread her needle, and when she
looked up, the lagoon that had always hitherto been such a laughing
place seemed formidable and unfriendly.

It was not, she knew, that night had come, but something as dark as
night had come. No, worse than that. It had not come, but it had sent
that shiver through the sea to say that it was coming. What was it?

There crowded upon her all the stories she had been told of Marooners’
Rock, so called because evil captains put sailors on it and leave them
there to drown. They drown when the tide rises, for then it is
submerged.

Of course she should have roused the children at once; not merely
because of the unknown that was stalking toward them, but because it
was no longer good for them to sleep on a rock grown chilly. But she
was a young mother and she did not know this; she thought you simply
must stick to your rule about half an hour after the mid-day meal. So,
though fear was upon her, and she longed to hear male voices, she would
not waken them. Even when she heard the sound of muffled oars, though
her heart was in her mouth, she did not waken them. She stood over them
to let them have their sleep out. Was it not brave of Wendy?

It was well for those boys then that there was one among them who could
sniff danger even in his sleep. Peter sprang erect, as wide awake at
once as a dog, and with one warning cry he roused the others.

He stood motionless, one hand to his ear.

“Pirates!” he cried. The others came closer to him. A strange smile was
playing about his face, and Wendy saw it and shuddered. While that
smile was on his face no one dared address him; all they could do was
to stand ready to obey. The order came sharp and incisive.

“Dive!”

There was a gleam of legs, and instantly the lagoon seemed deserted.
Marooners’ Rock stood alone in the forbidding waters as if it were
itself marooned.

The boat drew nearer. It was the pirate dinghy, with three figures in
her, Smee and Starkey, and the third a captive, no other than Tiger
Lily. Her hands and ankles were tied, and she knew what was to be her
fate. She was to be left on the rock to perish, an end to one of her
race more terrible than death by fire or torture, for is it not written
in the book of the tribe that there is no path through water to the
happy hunting-ground? Yet her face was impassive; she was the daughter
of a chief, she must die as a chief’s daughter, it is enough.

They had caught her boarding the pirate ship with a knife in her mouth.
No watch was kept on the ship, it being Hook’s boast that the wind of
his name guarded the ship for a mile around. Now her fate would help to
guard it also. One more wail would go the round in that wind by night.

In the gloom that they brought with them the two pirates did not see
the rock till they crashed into it.

“Luff, you lubber,” cried an Irish voice that was Smee’s; “here’s the
rock. Now, then, what we have to do is to hoist the redskin on to it
and leave her here to drown.”

It was the work of one brutal moment to land the beautiful girl on the
rock; she was too proud to offer a vain resistance.

Quite near the rock, but out of sight, two heads were bobbing up and
down, Peter’s and Wendy’s. Wendy was crying, for it was the first
tragedy she had seen. Peter had seen many tragedies, but he had
forgotten them all. He was less sorry than Wendy for Tiger Lily: it was
two against one that angered him, and he meant to save her. An easy way
would have been to wait until the pirates had gone, but he was never
one to choose the easy way.

There was almost nothing he could not do, and he now imitated the voice
of Hook.

“Ahoy there, you lubbers!” he called. It was a marvellous imitation.

“The captain!” said the pirates, staring at each other in surprise.

“He must be swimming out to us,” Starkey said, when they had looked for
him in vain.

“We are putting the redskin on the rock,” Smee called out.

“Set her free,” came the astonishing answer.

“Free!”

“Yes, cut her bonds and let her go.”

“But, captain—”

“At once, d’ye hear,” cried Peter, “or I’ll plunge my hook in you.”

“This is queer!” Smee gasped.

“Better do what the captain orders,” said Starkey nervously.

“Ay, ay,” Smee said, and he cut Tiger Lily’s cords. At once like an eel
she slid between Starkey’s legs into the water.

Of course Wendy was very elated over Peter’s cleverness; but she knew
that he would be elated also and very likely crow and thus betray
himself, so at once her hand went out to cover his mouth. But it was
stayed even in the act, for “Boat ahoy!” rang over the lagoon in Hook’s
voice, and this time it was not Peter who had spoken.

Peter may have been about to crow, but his face puckered in a whistle
of surprise instead.

“Boat ahoy!” again came the voice.

Now Wendy understood. The real Hook was also in the water.

He was swimming to the boat, and as his men showed a light to guide him
he had soon reached them. In the light of the lantern Wendy saw his
hook grip the boat’s side; she saw his evil swarthy face as he rose
dripping from the water, and, quaking, she would have liked to swim
away, but Peter would not budge. He was tingling with life and also
top-heavy with conceit. “Am I not a wonder, oh, I am a wonder!” he
whispered to her, and though she thought so also, she was really glad
for the sake of his reputation that no one heard him except herself.

He signed to her to listen.

The two pirates were very curious to know what had brought their
captain to them, but he sat with his head on his hook in a position of
profound melancholy.

“Captain, is all well?” they asked timidly, but he answered with a
hollow moan.

“He sighs,” said Smee.

“He sighs again,” said Starkey.

“And yet a third time he sighs,” said Smee.

Then at last he spoke passionately.

“The game’s up,” he cried, “those boys have found a mother.”

Affrighted though she was, Wendy swelled with pride.

“O evil day!” cried Starkey.

“What’s a mother?” asked the ignorant Smee.

Wendy was so shocked that she exclaimed. “He doesn’t know!” and always
after this she felt that if you could have a pet pirate Smee would be
her one.

Peter pulled her beneath the water, for Hook had started up, crying,
“What was that?”

“I heard nothing,” said Starkey, raising the lantern over the waters,
and as the pirates looked they saw a strange sight. It was the nest I
have told you of, floating on the lagoon, and the Never bird was
sitting on it.

“See,” said Hook in answer to Smee’s question, “that is a mother. What
a lesson! The nest must have fallen into the water, but would the
mother desert her eggs? No.”

There was a break in his voice, as if for a moment he recalled innocent
days when—but he brushed away this weakness with his hook.

Smee, much impressed, gazed at the bird as the nest was borne past, but
the more suspicious Starkey said, “If she is a mother, perhaps she is
hanging about here to help Peter.”

Hook winced. “Ay,” he said, “that is the fear that haunts me.”

He was roused from this dejection by Smee’s eager voice.

“Captain,” said Smee, “could we not kidnap these boys’ mother and make
her our mother?”

“It is a princely scheme,” cried Hook, and at once it took practical
shape in his great brain. “We will seize the children and carry them to
the boat: the boys we will make walk the plank, and Wendy shall be our
mother.”

Again Wendy forgot herself.

“Never!” she cried, and bobbed.

“What was that?”

But they could see nothing. They thought it must have been a leaf in
the wind. “Do you agree, my bullies?” asked Hook.

“There is my hand on it,” they both said.

“And there is my hook. Swear.”

They all swore. By this time they were on the rock, and suddenly Hook
remembered Tiger Lily.

“Where is the redskin?” he demanded abruptly.

He had a playful humour at moments, and they thought this was one of
the moments.

“That is all right, captain,” Smee answered complacently; “we let her
go.”

“Let her go!” cried Hook.

“’Twas your own orders,” the bo’sun faltered.

“You called over the water to us to let her go,” said Starkey.

“Brimstone and gall,” thundered Hook, “what cozening is going on here!”
His face had gone black with rage, but he saw that they believed their
words, and he was startled. “Lads,” he said, shaking a little, “I gave
no such order.”

“It is passing queer,” Smee said, and they all fidgeted uncomfortably.
Hook raised his voice, but there was a quiver in it.

“Spirit that haunts this dark lagoon to-night,” he cried, “dost hear
me?”

Of course Peter should have kept quiet, but of course he did not. He
immediately answered in Hook’s voice:

“Odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, I hear you.”

In that supreme moment Hook did not blanch, even at the gills, but Smee
and Starkey clung to each other in terror.

“Who are you, stranger? Speak!” Hook demanded.

“I am James Hook,” replied the voice, “captain of the _Jolly Roger_.”

“You are not; you are not,” Hook cried hoarsely.

“Brimstone and gall,” the voice retorted, “say that again, and I’ll
cast anchor in you.”

Hook tried a more ingratiating manner. “If you are Hook,” he said
almost humbly, “come tell me, who am I?”

“A codfish,” replied the voice, “only a codfish.”

“A codfish!” Hook echoed blankly, and it was then, but not till then,
that his proud spirit broke. He saw his men draw back from him.

“Have we been captained all this time by a codfish!” they muttered. “It
is lowering to our pride.”

They were his dogs snapping at him, but, tragic figure though he had
become, he scarcely heeded them. Against such fearful evidence it was
not their belief in him that he needed, it was his own. He felt his ego
slipping from him. “Don’t desert me, bully,” he whispered hoarsely to
it.

In his dark nature there was a touch of the feminine, as in all the
great pirates, and it sometimes gave him intuitions. Suddenly he tried
the guessing game.

“Hook,” he called, “have you another voice?”

Now Peter could never resist a game, and he answered blithely in his
own voice, “I have.”

“And another name?”

“Ay, ay.”

“Vegetable?” asked Hook.

“No.”

“Mineral?”

“No.”

“Animal?”

“Yes.”

“Man?”

“No!” This answer rang out scornfully.

“Boy?”

“Yes.”

“Ordinary boy?”

“No!”

“Wonderful boy?”

To Wendy’s pain the answer that rang out this time was “Yes.”

“Are you in England?”

“No.”

“Are you here?”

“Yes.”

Hook was completely puzzled. “You ask him some questions,” he said to
the others, wiping his damp brow.

Smee reflected. “I can’t think of a thing,” he said regretfully.

“Can’t guess, can’t guess!” crowed Peter. “Do you give it up?”

Of course in his pride he was carrying the game too far, and the
miscreants saw their chance.

“Yes, yes,” they answered eagerly.

“Well, then,” he cried, “I am Peter Pan.”

Pan!

In a moment Hook was himself again, and Smee and Starkey were his
faithful henchmen.

“Now we have him,” Hook shouted. “Into the water, Smee. Starkey, mind
the boat. Take him dead or alive!”

He leaped as he spoke, and simultaneously came the gay voice of Peter.

“Are you ready, boys?”

“Ay, ay,” from various parts of the lagoon.

“Then lam into the pirates.”

The fight was short and sharp. First to draw blood was John, who
gallantly climbed into the boat and held Starkey. There was fierce
struggle, in which the cutlass was torn from the pirate’s grasp. He
wriggled overboard and John leapt after him. The dinghy drifted away.

Here and there a head bobbed up in the water, and there was a flash of
steel followed by a cry or a whoop. In the confusion some struck at
their own side. The corkscrew of Smee got Tootles in the fourth rib,
but he was himself pinked in turn by Curly. Farther from the rock
Starkey was pressing Slightly and the twins hard.

Where all this time was Peter? He was seeking bigger game.

The others were all brave boys, and they must not be blamed for backing
from the pirate captain. His iron claw made a circle of dead water
round him, from which they fled like affrighted fishes.

But there was one who did not fear him: there was one prepared to enter
that circle.

Strangely, it was not in the water that they met. Hook rose to the rock
to breathe, and at the same moment Peter scaled it on the opposite
side. The rock was slippery as a ball, and they had to crawl rather
than climb. Neither knew that the other was coming. Each feeling for a
grip met the other’s arm: in surprise they raised their heads; their
faces were almost touching; so they met.

Some of the greatest heroes have confessed that just before they fell
to they had a sinking. Had it been so with Peter at that moment I would
admit it. After all, he was the only man that the Sea-Cook had feared.
But Peter had no sinking, he had one feeling only, gladness; and he
gnashed his pretty teeth with joy. Quick as thought he snatched a knife
from Hook’s belt and was about to drive it home, when he saw that he
was higher up the rock than his foe. It would not have been fighting
fair. He gave the pirate a hand to help him up.

It was then that Hook bit him.

Not the pain of this but its unfairness was what dazed Peter. It made
him quite helpless. He could only stare, horrified. Every child is
affected thus the first time he is treated unfairly. All he thinks he
has a right to when he comes to you to be yours is fairness. After you
have been unfair to him he will love you again, but will never
afterwards be quite the same boy. No one ever gets over the first
unfairness; no one except Peter. He often met it, but he always forgot
it. I suppose that was the real difference between him and all the
rest.

So when he met it now it was like the first time; and he could just
stare, helpless. Twice the iron hand clawed him.

A few moments afterwards the other boys saw Hook in the water striking
wildly for the ship; no elation on the pestilent face now, only white
fear, for the crocodile was in dogged pursuit of him. On ordinary
occasions the boys would have swum alongside cheering; but now they
were uneasy, for they had lost both Peter and Wendy, and were scouring
the lagoon for them, calling them by name. They found the dinghy and
went home in it, shouting “Peter, Wendy” as they went, but no answer
came save mocking laughter from the mermaids. “They must be swimming
back or flying,” the boys concluded. They were not very anxious,
because they had such faith in Peter. They chuckled, boylike, because
they would be late for bed; and it was all mother Wendy’s fault!

When their voices died away there came cold silence over the lagoon,
and then a feeble cry.

“Help, help!”

Two small figures were beating against the rock; the girl had fainted
and lay on the boy’s arm. With a last effort Peter pulled her up the
rock and then lay down beside her. Even as he also fainted he saw that
the water was rising. He knew that they would soon be drowned, but he
could do no more.

As they lay side by side a mermaid caught Wendy by the feet, and began
pulling her softly into the water. Peter, feeling her slip from him,
woke with a start, and was just in time to draw her back. But he had to
tell her the truth.

“We are on the rock, Wendy,” he said, “but it is growing smaller. Soon
the water will be over it.”

She did not understand even now.

“We must go,” she said, almost brightly.

“Yes,” he answered faintly.

“Shall we swim or fly, Peter?”

He had to tell her.

“Do you think you could swim or fly as far as the island, Wendy,
without my help?”

She had to admit that she was too tired.

He moaned.

“What is it?” she asked, anxious about him at once.

“I can’t help you, Wendy. Hook wounded me. I can neither fly nor swim.”

“Do you mean we shall both be drowned?”

“Look how the water is rising.”

They put their hands over their eyes to shut out the sight. They
thought they would soon be no more. As they sat thus something brushed
against Peter as light as a kiss, and stayed there, as if saying
timidly, “Can I be of any use?”

It was the tail of a kite, which Michael had made some days before. It
had torn itself out of his hand and floated away.

“Michael’s kite,” Peter said without interest, but next moment he had
seized the tail, and was pulling the kite toward him.

“It lifted Michael off the ground,” he cried; “why should it not carry
you?”

“Both of us!”

“It can’t lift two; Michael and Curly tried.”

“Let us draw lots,” Wendy said bravely.

“And you a lady; never.” Already he had tied the tail round her. She
clung to him; she refused to go without him; but with a “Good-bye,
Wendy,” he pushed her from the rock; and in a few minutes she was borne
out of his sight. Peter was alone on the lagoon.

The rock was very small now; soon it would be submerged. Pale rays of
light tiptoed across the waters; and by and by there was to be heard a
sound at once the most musical and the most melancholy in the world:
the mermaids calling to the moon.

Peter was not quite like other boys; but he was afraid at last. A
tremour ran through him, like a shudder passing over the sea; but on
the sea one shudder follows another till there are hundreds of them,
and Peter felt just the one. Next moment he was standing erect on the
rock again, with that smile on his face and a drum beating within him.
It was saying, “To die will be an awfully big adventure.”




Chapter IX.
THE NEVER BIRD


The last sound Peter heard before he was quite alone were the mermaids
retiring one by one to their bedchambers under the sea. He was too far
away to hear their doors shut; but every door in the coral caves where
they live rings a tiny bell when it opens or closes (as in all the
nicest houses on the mainland), and he heard the bells.

Steadily the waters rose till they were nibbling at his feet; and to
pass the time until they made their final gulp, he watched the only
thing on the lagoon. He thought it was a piece of floating paper,
perhaps part of the kite, and wondered idly how long it would take to
drift ashore.

Presently he noticed as an odd thing that it was undoubtedly out upon
the lagoon with some definite purpose, for it was fighting the tide,
and sometimes winning; and when it won, Peter, always sympathetic to
the weaker side, could not help clapping; it was such a gallant piece
of paper.

It was not really a piece of paper; it was the Never bird, making
desperate efforts to reach Peter on the nest. By working her wings, in
a way she had learned since the nest fell into the water, she was able
to some extent to guide her strange craft, but by the time Peter
recognised her she was very exhausted. She had come to save him, to
give him her nest, though there were eggs in it. I rather wonder at the
bird, for though he had been nice to her, he had also sometimes
tormented her. I can suppose only that, like Mrs. Darling and the rest
of them, she was melted because he had all his first teeth.

She called out to him what she had come for, and he called out to her
what she was doing there; but of course neither of them understood the
other’s language. In fanciful stories people can talk to the birds
freely, and I wish for the moment I could pretend that this were such a
story, and say that Peter replied intelligently to the Never bird; but
truth is best, and I want to tell you only what really happened. Well,
not only could they not understand each other, but they forgot their
manners.

“I—want—you—to—get—into—the—nest,” the bird called, speaking as slowly
and distinctly as possible, “and—then—you—can—drift—ashore,
but—I—am—too—tired—to—bring—it—any—nearer—so—you—must—try
to—swim—to—it.”

“What are you quacking about?” Peter answered. “Why don’t you let the
nest drift as usual?”

“I—want—you—” the bird said, and repeated it all over.

Then Peter tried slow and distinct.

“What—are—you—quacking—about?” and so on.

The Never bird became irritated; they have very short tempers.

“You dunderheaded little jay!” she screamed, “Why don’t you do as I
tell you?”

Peter felt that she was calling him names, and at a venture he retorted
hotly:

“So are you!”

Then rather curiously they both snapped out the same remark:

“Shut up!”

“Shut up!”

Nevertheless the bird was determined to save him if she could, and by
one last mighty effort she propelled the nest against the rock. Then up
she flew; deserting her eggs, so as to make her meaning clear.

Then at last he understood, and clutched the nest and waved his thanks
to the bird as she fluttered overhead. It was not to receive his
thanks, however, that she hung there in the sky; it was not even to
watch him get into the nest; it was to see what he did with her eggs.

There were two large white eggs, and Peter lifted them up and
reflected. The bird covered her face with her wings, so as not to see
the last of them; but she could not help peeping between the feathers.

I forget whether I have told you that there was a stave on the rock,
driven into it by some buccaneers of long ago to mark the site of
buried treasure. The children had discovered the glittering hoard, and
when in a mischievous mood used to fling showers of moidores, diamonds,
pearls and pieces of eight to the gulls, who pounced upon them for
food, and then flew away, raging at the scurvy trick that had been
played upon them. The stave was still there, and on it Starkey had hung
his hat, a deep tarpaulin, watertight, with a broad brim. Peter put the
eggs into this hat and set it on the lagoon. It floated beautifully.

The Never bird saw at once what he was up to, and screamed her
admiration of him; and, alas, Peter crowed his agreement with her. Then
he got into the nest, reared the stave in it as a mast, and hung up his
shirt for a sail. At the same moment the bird fluttered down upon the
hat and once more sat snugly on her eggs. She drifted in one direction,
and he was borne off in another, both cheering.

Of course when Peter landed he beached his barque in a place where the
bird would easily find it; but the hat was such a great success that
she abandoned the nest. It drifted about till it went to pieces, and
often Starkey came to the shore of the lagoon, and with many bitter
feelings watched the bird sitting on his hat. As we shall not see her
again, it may be worth mentioning here that all Never birds now build
in that shape of nest, with a broad brim on which the youngsters take
an airing.

Great were the rejoicings when Peter reached the home under the ground
almost as soon as Wendy, who had been carried hither and thither by the
kite. Every boy had adventures to tell; but perhaps the biggest
adventure of all was that they were several hours late for bed. This so
inflated them that they did various dodgy things to get staying up
still longer, such as demanding bandages; but Wendy, though glorying in
having them all home again safe and sound, was scandalised by the
lateness of the hour, and cried, “To bed, to bed,” in a voice that had
to be obeyed. Next day, however, she was awfully tender, and gave out
bandages to every one, and they played till bed-time at limping about
and carrying their arms in slings.




Chapter X.
THE HAPPY HOME


One important result of the brush on the lagoon was that it made the
redskins their friends. Peter had saved Tiger Lily from a dreadful
fate, and now there was nothing she and her braves would not do for
him. All night they sat above, keeping watch over the home under the
ground and awaiting the big attack by the pirates which obviously could
not be much longer delayed. Even by day they hung about, smoking the
pipe of peace, and looking almost as if they wanted tit-bits to eat.

They called Peter the Great White Father, prostrating themselves before
him; and he liked this tremendously, so that it was not really good for
him.

“The great white father,” he would say to them in a very lordly manner,
as they grovelled at his feet, “is glad to see the Piccaninny warriors
protecting his wigwam from the pirates.”

“Me Tiger Lily,” that lovely creature would reply. “Peter Pan save me,
me his velly nice friend. Me no let pirates hurt him.”

She was far too pretty to cringe in this way, but Peter thought it his
due, and he would answer condescendingly, “It is good. Peter Pan has
spoken.”

Always when he said, “Peter Pan has spoken,” it meant that they must
now shut up, and they accepted it humbly in that spirit; but they were
by no means so respectful to the other boys, whom they looked upon as
just ordinary braves. They said “How-do?” to them, and things like
that; and what annoyed the boys was that Peter seemed to think this all
right.

Secretly Wendy sympathised with them a little, but she was far too
loyal a housewife to listen to any complaints against father. “Father
knows best,” she always said, whatever her private opinion must be. Her
private opinion was that the redskins should not call her a squaw.

We have now reached the evening that was to be known among them as the
Night of Nights, because of its adventures and their upshot. The day,
as if quietly gathering its forces, had been almost uneventful, and now
the redskins in their blankets were at their posts above, while, below,
the children were having their evening meal; all except Peter, who had
gone out to get the time. The way you got the time on the island was to
find the crocodile, and then stay near him till the clock struck.

The meal happened to be a make-believe tea, and they sat around the
board, guzzling in their greed; and really, what with their chatter and
recriminations, the noise, as Wendy said, was positively deafening. To
be sure, she did not mind noise, but she simply would not have them
grabbing things, and then excusing themselves by saying that Tootles
had pushed their elbow. There was a fixed rule that they must never hit
back at meals, but should refer the matter of dispute to Wendy by
raising the right arm politely and saying, “I complain of so-and-so;”
but what usually happened was that they forgot to do this or did it too
much.

“Silence,” cried Wendy when for the twentieth time she had told them
that they were not all to speak at once. “Is your mug empty, Slightly
darling?”

“Not quite empty, mummy,” Slightly said, after looking into an
imaginary mug.

“He hasn’t even begun to drink his milk,” Nibs interposed.

This was telling, and Slightly seized his chance.

“I complain of Nibs,” he cried promptly.

John, however, had held up his hand first.

“Well, John?”

“May I sit in Peter’s chair, as he is not here?”

“Sit in father’s chair, John!” Wendy was scandalised. “Certainly not.”

“He is not really our father,” John answered. “He didn’t even know how
a father does till I showed him.”

This was grumbling. “We complain of John,” cried the twins.

Tootles held up his hand. He was so much the humblest of them, indeed
he was the only humble one, that Wendy was specially gentle with him.

“I don’t suppose,” Tootles said diffidently, “that I could be father.”

“No, Tootles.”

Once Tootles began, which was not very often, he had a silly way of
going on.

“As I can’t be father,” he said heavily, “I don’t suppose, Michael, you
would let me be baby?”

“No, I won’t,” Michael rapped out. He was already in his basket.

“As I can’t be baby,” Tootles said, getting heavier and heavier and
heavier, “do you think I could be a twin?”

“No, indeed,” replied the twins; “it’s awfully difficult to be a twin.”

“As I can’t be anything important,” said Tootles, “would any of you
like to see me do a trick?”

“No,” they all replied.

Then at last he stopped. “I hadn’t really any hope,” he said.

The hateful telling broke out again.

“Slightly is coughing on the table.”

“The twins began with cheese-cakes.”

“Curly is taking both butter and honey.”

“Nibs is speaking with his mouth full.”

“I complain of the twins.”

“I complain of Curly.”

“I complain of Nibs.”

“Oh dear, oh dear,” cried Wendy, “I’m sure I sometimes think that
spinsters are to be envied.”

She told them to clear away, and sat down to her work-basket, a heavy
load of stockings and every knee with a hole in it as usual.

“Wendy,” remonstrated Michael, “I’m too big for a cradle.”

“I must have somebody in a cradle,” she said almost tartly, “and you
are the littlest. A cradle is such a nice homely thing to have about a
house.”

While she sewed they played around her; such a group of happy faces and
dancing limbs lit up by that romantic fire. It had become a very
familiar scene, this, in the home under the ground, but we are looking
on it for the last time.

There was a step above, and Wendy, you may be sure, was the first to
recognize it.

“Children, I hear your father’s step. He likes you to meet him at the
door.”

Above, the redskins crouched before Peter.

“Watch well, braves. I have spoken.”

And then, as so often before, the gay children dragged him from his
tree. As so often before, but never again.

He had brought nuts for the boys as well as the correct time for Wendy.

“Peter, you just spoil them, you know,” Wendy simpered.

“Ah, old lady,” said Peter, hanging up his gun.

“It was me told him mothers are called old lady,” Michael whispered to
Curly.

“I complain of Michael,” said Curly instantly.

The first twin came to Peter. “Father, we want to dance.”

“Dance away, my little man,” said Peter, who was in high good humour.

“But we want you to dance.”

Peter was really the best dancer among them, but he pretended to be
scandalised.

“Me! My old bones would rattle!”

“And mummy too.”

“What,” cried Wendy, “the mother of such an armful, dance!”

“But on a Saturday night,” Slightly insinuated.

It was not really Saturday night, at least it may have been, for they
had long lost count of the days; but always if they wanted to do
anything special they said this was Saturday night, and then they did
it.

“Of course it is Saturday night, Peter,” Wendy said, relenting.

“People of our figure, Wendy!”

“But it is only among our own progeny.”

“True, true.”

So they were told they could dance, but they must put on their nighties
first.

“Ah, old lady,” Peter said aside to Wendy, warming himself by the fire
and looking down at her as she sat turning a heel, “there is nothing
more pleasant of an evening for you and me when the day’s toil is over
than to rest by the fire with the little ones near by.”

“It is sweet, Peter, isn’t it?” Wendy said, frightfully gratified.
“Peter, I think Curly has your nose.”

“Michael takes after you.”

She went to him and put her hand on his shoulder.

“Dear Peter,” she said, “with such a large family, of course, I have
now passed my best, but you don’t want to change me, do you?”

“No, Wendy.”

Certainly he did not want a change, but he looked at her uncomfortably,
blinking, you know, like one not sure whether he was awake or asleep.

“Peter, what is it?”

“I was just thinking,” he said, a little scared. “It is only
make-believe, isn’t it, that I am their father?”

“Oh yes,” Wendy said primly.

“You see,” he continued apologetically, “it would make me seem so old
to be their real father.”

“But they are ours, Peter, yours and mine.”

“But not really, Wendy?” he asked anxiously.

“Not if you don’t wish it,” she replied; and she distinctly heard his
sigh of relief. “Peter,” she asked, trying to speak firmly, “what are
your exact feelings to me?”

“Those of a devoted son, Wendy.”

“I thought so,” she said, and went and sat by herself at the extreme
end of the room.

“You are so queer,” he said, frankly puzzled, “and Tiger Lily is just
the same. There is something she wants to be to me, but she says it is
not my mother.”

“No, indeed, it is not,” Wendy replied with frightful emphasis. Now we
know why she was prejudiced against the redskins.

“Then what is it?”

“It isn’t for a lady to tell.”

“Oh, very well,” Peter said, a little nettled. “Perhaps Tinker Bell
will tell me.”

“Oh yes, Tinker Bell will tell you,” Wendy retorted scornfully. “She is
an abandoned little creature.”

Here Tink, who was in her bedroom, eavesdropping, squeaked out
something impudent.

“She says she glories in being abandoned,” Peter interpreted.

He had a sudden idea. “Perhaps Tink wants to be my mother?”

“You silly ass!” cried Tinker Bell in a passion.

She had said it so often that Wendy needed no translation.

“I almost agree with her,” Wendy snapped. Fancy Wendy snapping! But she
had been much tried, and she little knew what was to happen before the
night was out. If she had known she would not have snapped.

None of them knew. Perhaps it was best not to know. Their ignorance
gave them one more glad hour; and as it was to be their last hour on
the island, let us rejoice that there were sixty glad minutes in it.
They sang and danced in their night-gowns. Such a deliciously creepy
song it was, in which they pretended to be frightened at their own
shadows, little witting that so soon shadows would close in upon them,
from whom they would shrink in real fear. So uproariously gay was the
dance, and how they buffeted each other on the bed and out of it! It
was a pillow fight rather than a dance, and when it was finished, the
pillows insisted on one bout more, like partners who know that they may
never meet again. The stories they told, before it was time for Wendy’s
good-night story! Even Slightly tried to tell a story that night, but
the beginning was so fearfully dull that it appalled not only the
others but himself, and he said gloomily:

“Yes, it is a dull beginning. I say, let us pretend that it is the
end.”

And then at last they all got into bed for Wendy’s story, the story
they loved best, the story Peter hated. Usually when she began to tell
this story he left the room or put his hands over his ears; and
possibly if he had done either of those things this time they might all
still be on the island. But to-night he remained on his stool; and we
shall see what happened.




Chapter XI.
WENDY’S STORY


“Listen, then,” said Wendy, settling down to her story, with Michael at
her feet and seven boys in the bed. “There was once a gentleman—”

“I had rather he had been a lady,” Curly said.

“I wish he had been a white rat,” said Nibs.

“Quiet,” their mother admonished them. “There was a lady also, and—”

“Oh, mummy,” cried the first twin, “you mean that there is a lady also,
don’t you? She is not dead, is she?”

“Oh, no.”

“I am awfully glad she isn’t dead,” said Tootles. “Are you glad, John?”

“Of course I am.”

“Are you glad, Nibs?”

“Rather.”

“Are you glad, Twins?”

“We are glad.”

“Oh dear,” sighed Wendy.

“Little less noise there,” Peter called out, determined that she should
have fair play, however beastly a story it might be in his opinion.

“The gentleman’s name,” Wendy continued, “was Mr. Darling, and her name
was Mrs. Darling.”

“I knew them,” John said, to annoy the others.

“I think I knew them,” said Michael rather doubtfully.

“They were married, you know,” explained Wendy, “and what do you think
they had?”

“White rats,” cried Nibs, inspired.

“No.”

“It’s awfully puzzling,” said Tootles, who knew the story by heart.

“Quiet, Tootles. They had three descendants.”

“What is descendants?”

“Well, you are one, Twin.”

“Did you hear that, John? I am a descendant.”

“Descendants are only children,” said John.

“Oh dear, oh dear,” sighed Wendy. “Now these three children had a
faithful nurse called Nana; but Mr. Darling was angry with her and
chained her up in the yard, and so all the children flew away.”

“It’s an awfully good story,” said Nibs.

“They flew away,” Wendy continued, “to the Neverland, where the lost
children are.”

“I just thought they did,” Curly broke in excitedly. “I don’t know how
it is, but I just thought they did!”

“O Wendy,” cried Tootles, “was one of the lost children called
Tootles?”

“Yes, he was.”

“I am in a story. Hurrah, I am in a story, Nibs.”

“Hush. Now I want you to consider the feelings of the unhappy parents
with all their children flown away.”

“Oo!” they all moaned, though they were not really considering the
feelings of the unhappy parents one jot.

“Think of the empty beds!”

“Oo!”

“It’s awfully sad,” the first twin said cheerfully.

“I don’t see how it can have a happy ending,” said the second twin. “Do
you, Nibs?”

“I’m frightfully anxious.”

“If you knew how great is a mother’s love,” Wendy told them
triumphantly, “you would have no fear.” She had now come to the part
that Peter hated.

“I do like a mother’s love,” said Tootles, hitting Nibs with a pillow.
“Do you like a mother’s love, Nibs?”

“I do just,” said Nibs, hitting back.

“You see,” Wendy said complacently, “our heroine knew that the mother
would always leave the window open for her children to fly back by; so
they stayed away for years and had a lovely time.”

“Did they ever go back?”

“Let us now,” said Wendy, bracing herself up for her finest effort,
“take a peep into the future;” and they all gave themselves the twist
that makes peeps into the future easier. “Years have rolled by, and who
is this elegant lady of uncertain age alighting at London Station?”

“O Wendy, who is she?” cried Nibs, every bit as excited as if he didn’t
know.

“Can it be—yes—no—it is—the fair Wendy!”

“Oh!”

“And who are the two noble portly figures accompanying her, now grown
to man’s estate? Can they be John and Michael? They are!”

“Oh!”

“‘See, dear brothers,’ says Wendy pointing upwards, ‘there is the
window still standing open. Ah, now we are rewarded for our sublime
faith in a mother’s love.’ So up they flew to their mummy and daddy,
and pen cannot describe the happy scene, over which we draw a veil.”

That was the story, and they were as pleased with it as the fair
narrator herself. Everything just as it should be, you see. Off we skip
like the most heartless things in the world, which is what children
are, but so attractive; and we have an entirely selfish time, and then
when we have need of special attention we nobly return for it,
confident that we shall be rewarded instead of smacked.

So great indeed was their faith in a mother’s love that they felt they
could afford to be callous for a bit longer.

But there was one there who knew better, and when Wendy finished he
uttered a hollow groan.

“What is it, Peter?” she cried, running to him, thinking he was ill.
She felt him solicitously, lower down than his chest. “Where is it,
Peter?”

“It isn’t that kind of pain,” Peter replied darkly.

“Then what kind is it?”

“Wendy, you are wrong about mothers.”

They all gathered round him in affright, so alarming was his agitation;
and with a fine candour he told them what he had hitherto concealed.

“Long ago,” he said, “I thought like you that my mother would always
keep the window open for me, so I stayed away for moons and moons and
moons, and then flew back; but the window was barred, for mother had
forgotten all about me, and there was another little boy sleeping in my
bed.”

I am not sure that this was true, but Peter thought it was true; and it
scared them.

“Are you sure mothers are like that?”

“Yes.”

So this was the truth about mothers. The toads!

Still it is best to be careful; and no one knows so quickly as a child
when he should give in. “Wendy, let us go home,” cried John and Michael
together.

“Yes,” she said, clutching them.

“Not to-night?” asked the lost boys bewildered. They knew in what they
called their hearts that one can get on quite well without a mother,
and that it is only the mothers who think you can’t.

“At once,” Wendy replied resolutely, for the horrible thought had come
to her: “Perhaps mother is in half mourning by this time.”

This dread made her forgetful of what must be Peter’s feelings, and she
said to him rather sharply, “Peter, will you make the necessary
arrangements?”

“If you wish it,” he replied, as coolly as if she had asked him to pass
the nuts.

Not so much as a sorry-to-lose-you between them! If she did not mind
the parting, he was going to show her, was Peter, that neither did he.

But of course he cared very much; and he was so full of wrath against
grown-ups, who, as usual, were spoiling everything, that as soon as he
got inside his tree he breathed intentionally quick short breaths at
the rate of about five to a second. He did this because there is a
saying in the Neverland that, every time you breathe, a grown-up dies;
and Peter was killing them off vindictively as fast as possible.

Then having given the necessary instructions to the redskins he
returned to the home, where an unworthy scene had been enacted in his
absence. Panic-stricken at the thought of losing Wendy the lost boys
had advanced upon her threateningly.

“It will be worse than before she came,” they cried.

“We shan’t let her go.”

“Let’s keep her prisoner.”

“Ay, chain her up.”

In her extremity an instinct told her to which of them to turn.

“Tootles,” she cried, “I appeal to you.”

Was it not strange? She appealed to Tootles, quite the silliest one.

Grandly, however, did Tootles respond. For that one moment he dropped
his silliness and spoke with dignity.

“I am just Tootles,” he said, “and nobody minds me. But the first who
does not behave to Wendy like an English gentleman I will blood him
severely.”

He drew back his hanger; and for that instant his sun was at noon. The
others held back uneasily. Then Peter returned, and they saw at once
that they would get no support from him. He would keep no girl in the
Neverland against her will.

“Wendy,” he said, striding up and down, “I have asked the redskins to
guide you through the wood, as flying tires you so.”

“Thank you, Peter.”

“Then,” he continued, in the short sharp voice of one accustomed to be
obeyed, “Tinker Bell will take you across the sea. Wake her, Nibs.”

Nibs had to knock twice before he got an answer, though Tink had really
been sitting up in bed listening for some time.

“Who are you? How dare you? Go away,” she cried.

“You are to get up, Tink,” Nibs called, “and take Wendy on a journey.”

Of course Tink had been delighted to hear that Wendy was going; but she
was jolly well determined not to be her courier, and she said so in
still more offensive language. Then she pretended to be asleep again.

“She says she won’t!” Nibs exclaimed, aghast at such insubordination,
whereupon Peter went sternly toward the young lady’s chamber.

“Tink,” he rapped out, “if you don’t get up and dress at once I will
open the curtains, and then we shall all see you in your _negligée_.”

This made her leap to the floor. “Who said I wasn’t getting up?” she
cried.

In the meantime the boys were gazing very forlornly at Wendy, now
equipped with John and Michael for the journey. By this time they were
dejected, not merely because they were about to lose her, but also
because they felt that she was going off to something nice to which
they had not been invited. Novelty was beckoning to them as usual.

Crediting them with a nobler feeling Wendy melted.

“Dear ones,” she said, “if you will all come with me I feel almost sure
I can get my father and mother to adopt you.”

The invitation was meant specially for Peter, but each of the boys was
thinking exclusively of himself, and at once they jumped with joy.

“But won’t they think us rather a handful?” Nibs asked in the middle of
his jump.

“Oh no,” said Wendy, rapidly thinking it out, “it will only mean having
a few beds in the drawing-room; they can be hidden behind the screens
on first Thursdays.”

“Peter, can we go?” they all cried imploringly. They took it for
granted that if they went he would go also, but really they scarcely
cared. Thus children are ever ready, when novelty knocks, to desert
their dearest ones.

“All right,” Peter replied with a bitter smile, and immediately they
rushed to get their things.

“And now, Peter,” Wendy said, thinking she had put everything right, “I
am going to give you your medicine before you go.” She loved to give
them medicine, and undoubtedly gave them too much. Of course it was
only water, but it was out of a bottle, and she always shook the bottle
and counted the drops, which gave it a certain medicinal quality. On
this occasion, however, she did not give Peter his draught, for just as
she had prepared it, she saw a look on his face that made her heart
sink.

“Get your things, Peter,” she cried, shaking.

“No,” he answered, pretending indifference, “I am not going with you,
Wendy.”

“Yes, Peter.”

“No.”

To show that her departure would leave him unmoved, he skipped up and
down the room, playing gaily on his heartless pipes. She had to run
about after him, though it was rather undignified.

“To find your mother,” she coaxed.

Now, if Peter had ever quite had a mother, he no longer missed her. He
could do very well without one. He had thought them out, and remembered
only their bad points.

“No, no,” he told Wendy decisively; “perhaps she would say I was old,
and I just want always to be a little boy and to have fun.”

“But, Peter—”

“No.”

And so the others had to be told.

“Peter isn’t coming.”

Peter not coming! They gazed blankly at him, their sticks over their
backs, and on each stick a bundle. Their first thought was that if
Peter was not going he had probably changed his mind about letting them
go.

But he was far too proud for that. “If you find your mothers,” he said
darkly, “I hope you will like them.”

The awful cynicism of this made an uncomfortable impression, and most
of them began to look rather doubtful. After all, their faces said,
were they not noodles to want to go?

“Now then,” cried Peter, “no fuss, no blubbering; good-bye, Wendy;” and
he held out his hand cheerily, quite as if they must really go now, for
he had something important to do.

She had to take his hand, and there was no indication that he would
prefer a thimble.

“You will remember about changing your flannels, Peter?” she said,
lingering over him. She was always so particular about their flannels.

“Yes.”

“And you will take your medicine?”

“Yes.”

That seemed to be everything, and an awkward pause followed. Peter,
however, was not the kind that breaks down before other people. “Are
you ready, Tinker Bell?” he called out.

“Ay, ay.”

“Then lead the way.”

Tink darted up the nearest tree; but no one followed her, for it was at
this moment that the pirates made their dreadful attack upon the
redskins. Above, where all had been so still, the air was rent with
shrieks and the clash of steel. Below, there was dead silence. Mouths
opened and remained open. Wendy fell on her knees, but her arms were
extended toward Peter. All arms were extended to him, as if suddenly
blown in his direction; they were beseeching him mutely not to desert
them. As for Peter, he seized his sword, the same he thought he had
slain Barbecue with, and the lust of battle was in his eye.




Chapter XII.
THE CHILDREN ARE CARRIED OFF


The pirate attack had been a complete surprise: a sure proof that the
unscrupulous Hook had conducted it improperly, for to surprise redskins
fairly is beyond the wit of the white man.

By all the unwritten laws of savage warfare it is always the redskin
who attacks, and with the wiliness of his race he does it just before
the dawn, at which time he knows the courage of the whites to be at its
lowest ebb. The white men have in the meantime made a rude stockade on
the summit of yonder undulating ground, at the foot of which a stream
runs, for it is destruction to be too far from water. There they await
the onslaught, the inexperienced ones clutching their revolvers and
treading on twigs, but the old hands sleeping tranquilly until just
before the dawn. Through the long black night the savage scouts
wriggle, snake-like, among the grass without stirring a blade. The
brushwood closes behind them, as silently as sand into which a mole has
dived. Not a sound is to be heard, save when they give vent to a
wonderful imitation of the lonely call of the coyote. The cry is
answered by other braves; and some of them do it even better than the
coyotes, who are not very good at it. So the chill hours wear on, and
the long suspense is horribly trying to the paleface who has to live
through it for the first time; but to the trained hand those ghastly
calls and still ghastlier silences are but an intimation of how the
night is marching.

That this was the usual procedure was so well known to Hook that in
disregarding it he cannot be excused on the plea of ignorance.

The Piccaninnies, on their part, trusted implicitly to his honour, and
their whole action of the night stands out in marked contrast to his.
They left nothing undone that was consistent with the reputation of
their tribe. With that alertness of the senses which is at once the
marvel and despair of civilised peoples, they knew that the pirates
were on the island from the moment one of them trod on a dry stick; and
in an incredibly short space of time the coyote cries began. Every foot
of ground between the spot where Hook had landed his forces and the
home under the trees was stealthily examined by braves wearing their
mocassins with the heels in front. They found only one hillock with a
stream at its base, so that Hook had no choice; here he must establish
himself and wait for just before the dawn. Everything being thus mapped
out with almost diabolical cunning, the main body of the redskins
folded their blankets around them, and in the phlegmatic manner that is
to them, the pearl of manhood squatted above the children’s home,
awaiting the cold moment when they should deal pale death.

Here dreaming, though wide-awake, of the exquisite tortures to which
they were to put him at break of day, those confiding savages were
found by the treacherous Hook. From the accounts afterwards supplied by
such of the scouts as escaped the carnage, he does not seem even to
have paused at the rising ground, though it is certain that in that
grey light he must have seen it: no thought of waiting to be attacked
appears from first to last to have visited his subtle mind; he would
not even hold off till the night was nearly spent; on he pounded with
no policy but to fall to. What could the bewildered scouts do, masters
as they were of every war-like artifice save this one, but trot
helplessly after him, exposing themselves fatally to view, while they
gave pathetic utterance to the coyote cry.

Around the brave Tiger Lily were a dozen of her stoutest warriors, and
they suddenly saw the perfidious pirates bearing down upon them. Fell
from their eyes then the film through which they had looked at victory.
No more would they torture at the stake. For them the happy
hunting-grounds was now. They knew it; but as their father’s sons they
acquitted themselves. Even then they had time to gather in a phalanx
that would have been hard to break had they risen quickly, but this
they were forbidden to do by the traditions of their race. It is
written that the noble savage must never express surprise in the
presence of the white. Thus terrible as the sudden appearance of the
pirates must have been to them, they remained stationary for a moment,
not a muscle moving; as if the foe had come by invitation. Then,
indeed, the tradition gallantly upheld, they seized their weapons, and
the air was torn with the war-cry; but it was now too late.

It is no part of ours to describe what was a massacre rather than a
fight. Thus perished many of the flower of the Piccaninny tribe. Not
all unavenged did they die, for with Lean Wolf fell Alf Mason, to
disturb the Spanish Main no more, and among others who bit the dust
were Geo. Scourie, Chas. Turley, and the Alsatian Foggerty. Turley fell
to the tomahawk of the terrible Panther, who ultimately cut a way
through the pirates with Tiger Lily and a small remnant of the tribe.

To what extent Hook is to blame for his tactics on this occasion is for
the historian to decide. Had he waited on the rising ground till the
proper hour he and his men would probably have been butchered; and in
judging him it is only fair to take this into account. What he should
perhaps have done was to acquaint his opponents that he proposed to
follow a new method. On the other hand, this, as destroying the element
of surprise, would have made his strategy of no avail, so that the
whole question is beset with difficulties. One cannot at least withhold
a reluctant admiration for the wit that had conceived so bold a scheme,
and the fell genius with which it was carried out.

What were his own feelings about himself at that triumphant moment?
Fain would his dogs have known, as breathing heavily and wiping their
cutlasses, they gathered at a discreet distance from his hook, and
squinted through their ferret eyes at this extraordinary man. Elation
must have been in his heart, but his face did not reflect it: ever a
dark and solitary enigma, he stood aloof from his followers in spirit
as in substance.

The night’s work was not yet over, for it was not the redskins he had
come out to destroy; they were but the bees to be smoked, so that he
should get at the honey. It was Pan he wanted, Pan and Wendy and their
band, but chiefly Pan.

Peter was such a small boy that one tends to wonder at the man’s hatred
of him. True he had flung Hook’s arm to the crocodile, but even this
and the increased insecurity of life to which it led, owing to the
crocodile’s pertinacity, hardly account for a vindictiveness so
relentless and malignant. The truth is that there was a something about
Peter which goaded the pirate captain to frenzy. It was not his
courage, it was not his engaging appearance, it was not—. There is no
beating about the bush, for we know quite well what it was, and have
got to tell. It was Peter’s cockiness.

This had got on Hook’s nerves; it made his iron claw twitch, and at
night it disturbed him like an insect. While Peter lived, the tortured
man felt that he was a lion in a cage into which a sparrow had come.

The question now was how to get down the trees, or how to get his dogs
down? He ran his greedy eyes over them, searching for the thinnest
ones. They wriggled uncomfortably, for they knew he would not scruple
to ram them down with poles.

In the meantime, what of the boys? We have seen them at the first clang
of the weapons, turned as it were into stone figures, open-mouthed, all
appealing with outstretched arms to Peter; and we return to them as
their mouths close, and their arms fall to their sides. The pandemonium
above has ceased almost as suddenly as it arose, passed like a fierce
gust of wind; but they know that in the passing it has determined their
fate.

Which side had won?

The pirates, listening avidly at the mouths of the trees, heard the
question put by every boy, and alas, they also heard Peter’s answer.

“If the redskins have won,” he said, “they will beat the tom-tom; it is
always their sign of victory.”

Now Smee had found the tom-tom, and was at that moment sitting on it.
“You will never hear the tom-tom again,” he muttered, but inaudibly of
course, for strict silence had been enjoined. To his amazement Hook
signed him to beat the tom-tom, and slowly there came to Smee an
understanding of the dreadful wickedness of the order. Never, probably,
had this simple man admired Hook so much.

Twice Smee beat upon the instrument, and then stopped to listen
gleefully.

“The tom-tom,” the miscreants heard Peter cry; “an Indian victory!”

The doomed children answered with a cheer that was music to the black
hearts above, and almost immediately they repeated their good-byes to
Peter. This puzzled the pirates, but all their other feelings were
swallowed by a base delight that the enemy were about to come up the
trees. They smirked at each other and rubbed their hands. Rapidly and
silently Hook gave his orders: one man to each tree, and the others to
arrange themselves in a line two yards apart.




Chapter XIII.
DO YOU BELIEVE IN FAIRIES?


The more quickly this horror is disposed of the better. The first to
emerge from his tree was Curly. He rose out of it into the arms of
Cecco, who flung him to Smee, who flung him to Starkey, who flung him
to Bill Jukes, who flung him to Noodler, and so he was tossed from one
to another till he fell at the feet of the black pirate. All the boys
were plucked from their trees in this ruthless manner; and several of
them were in the air at a time, like bales of goods flung from hand to
hand.

A different treatment was accorded to Wendy, who came last. With
ironical politeness Hook raised his hat to her, and, offering her his
arm, escorted her to the spot where the others were being gagged. He
did it with such an air, he was so frightfully _distingué_, that she
was too fascinated to cry out. She was only a little girl.

Perhaps it is tell-tale to divulge that for a moment Hook entranced
her, and we tell on her only because her slip led to strange results.
Had she haughtily unhanded him (and we should have loved to write it of
her), she would have been hurled through the air like the others, and
then Hook would probably not have been present at the tying of the
children; and had he not been at the tying he would not have discovered
Slightly’s secret, and without the secret he could not presently have
made his foul attempt on Peter’s life.

They were tied to prevent their flying away, doubled up with their
knees close to their ears; and for the trussing of them the black
pirate had cut a rope into nine equal pieces. All went well until
Slightly’s turn came, when he was found to be like those irritating
parcels that use up all the string in going round and leave no tags
with which to tie a knot. The pirates kicked him in their rage, just as
you kick the parcel (though in fairness you should kick the string);
and strange to say it was Hook who told them to belay their violence.
His lip was curled with malicious triumph. While his dogs were merely
sweating because every time they tried to pack the unhappy lad tight in
one part he bulged out in another, Hook’s master mind had gone far
beneath Slightly’s surface, probing not for effects but for causes; and
his exultation showed that he had found them. Slightly, white to the
gills, knew that Hook had surprised his secret, which was this, that no
boy so blown out could use a tree wherein an average man need stick.
Poor Slightly, most wretched of all the children now, for he was in a
panic about Peter, bitterly regretted what he had done. Madly addicted
to the drinking of water when he was hot, he had swelled in consequence
to his present girth, and instead of reducing himself to fit his tree
he had, unknown to the others, whittled his tree to make it fit him.

Sufficient of this Hook guessed to persuade him that Peter at last lay
at his mercy, but no word of the dark design that now formed in the
subterranean caverns of his mind crossed his lips; he merely signed
that the captives were to be conveyed to the ship, and that he would be
alone.

How to convey them? Hunched up in their ropes they might indeed be
rolled down hill like barrels, but most of the way lay through a
morass. Again Hook’s genius surmounted difficulties. He indicated that
the little house must be used as a conveyance. The children were flung
into it, four stout pirates raised it on their shoulders, the others
fell in behind, and singing the hateful pirate chorus the strange
procession set off through the wood. I don’t know whether any of the
children were crying; if so, the singing drowned the sound; but as the
little house disappeared in the forest, a brave though tiny jet of
smoke issued from its chimney as if defying Hook.

Hook saw it, and it did Peter a bad service. It dried up any trickle of
pity for him that may have remained in the pirate’s infuriated breast.

The first thing he did on finding himself alone in the fast falling
night was to tiptoe to Slightly’s tree, and make sure that it provided
him with a passage. Then for long he remained brooding; his hat of ill
omen on the sward, so that any gentle breeze which had arisen might
play refreshingly through his hair. Dark as were his thoughts his blue
eyes were as soft as the periwinkle. Intently he listened for any sound
from the nether world, but all was as silent below as above; the house
under the ground seemed to be but one more empty tenement in the void.
Was that boy asleep, or did he stand waiting at the foot of Slightly’s
tree, with his dagger in his hand?

There was no way of knowing, save by going down. Hook let his cloak
slip softly to the ground, and then biting his lips till a lewd blood
stood on them, he stepped into the tree. He was a brave man, but for a
moment he had to stop there and wipe his brow, which was dripping like
a candle. Then, silently, he let himself go into the unknown.

He arrived unmolested at the foot of the shaft, and stood still again,
biting at his breath, which had almost left him. As his eyes became
accustomed to the dim light various objects in the home under the trees
took shape; but the only one on which his greedy gaze rested, long
sought for and found at last, was the great bed. On the bed lay Peter
fast asleep.

Unaware of the tragedy being enacted above, Peter had continued, for a
little time after the children left, to play gaily on his pipes: no
doubt rather a forlorn attempt to prove to himself that he did not
care. Then he decided not to take his medicine, so as to grieve Wendy.
Then he lay down on the bed outside the coverlet, to vex her still
more; for she had always tucked them inside it, because you never know
that you may not grow chilly at the turn of the night. Then he nearly
cried; but it struck him how indignant she would be if he laughed
instead; so he laughed a haughty laugh and fell asleep in the middle of
it.

Sometimes, though not often, he had dreams, and they were more painful
than the dreams of other boys. For hours he could not be separated from
these dreams, though he wailed piteously in them. They had to do, I
think, with the riddle of his existence. At such times it had been
Wendy’s custom to take him out of bed and sit with him on her lap,
soothing him in dear ways of her own invention, and when he grew calmer
to put him back to bed before he quite woke up, so that he should not
know of the indignity to which she had subjected him. But on this
occasion he had fallen at once into a dreamless sleep. One arm dropped
over the edge of the bed, one leg was arched, and the unfinished part
of his laugh was stranded on his mouth, which was open, showing the
little pearls.

Thus defenceless Hook found him. He stood silent at the foot of the
tree looking across the chamber at his enemy. Did no feeling of
compassion disturb his sombre breast? The man was not wholly evil; he
loved flowers (I have been told) and sweet music (he was himself no
mean performer on the harpsichord); and, let it be frankly admitted,
the idyllic nature of the scene stirred him profoundly. Mastered by his
better self he would have returned reluctantly up the tree, but for one
thing.

What stayed him was Peter’s impertinent appearance as he slept. The
open mouth, the drooping arm, the arched knee: they were such a
personification of cockiness as, taken together, will never again, one
may hope, be presented to eyes so sensitive to their offensiveness.
They steeled Hook’s heart. If his rage had broken him into a hundred
pieces every one of them would have disregarded the incident, and leapt
at the sleeper.

Though a light from the one lamp shone dimly on the bed, Hook stood in
darkness himself, and at the first stealthy step forward he discovered
an obstacle, the door of Slightly’s tree. It did not entirely fill the
aperture, and he had been looking over it. Feeling for the catch, he
found to his fury that it was low down, beyond his reach. To his
disordered brain it seemed then that the irritating quality in Peter’s
face and figure visibly increased, and he rattled the door and flung
himself against it. Was his enemy to escape him after all?

But what was that? The red in his eye had caught sight of Peter’s
medicine standing on a ledge within easy reach. He fathomed what it was
straightaway, and immediately knew that the sleeper was in his power.

Lest he should be taken alive, Hook always carried about his person a
dreadful drug, blended by himself of all the death-dealing rings that
had come into his possession. These he had boiled down into a yellow
liquid quite unknown to science, which was probably the most virulent
poison in existence.

Five drops of this he now added to Peter’s cup. His hand shook, but it
was in exultation rather than in shame. As he did it he avoided
glancing at the sleeper, but not lest pity should unnerve him; merely
to avoid spilling. Then one long gloating look he cast upon his victim,
and turning, wormed his way with difficulty up the tree. As he emerged
at the top he looked the very spirit of evil breaking from its hole.
Donning his hat at its most rakish angle, he wound his cloak around
him, holding one end in front as if to conceal his person from the
night, of which it was the blackest part, and muttering strangely to
himself, stole away through the trees.

Peter slept on. The light guttered and went out, leaving the tenement
in darkness; but still he slept. It must have been not less than ten
o’clock by the crocodile, when he suddenly sat up in his bed, wakened
by he knew not what. It was a soft cautious tapping on the door of his
tree.

Soft and cautious, but in that stillness it was sinister. Peter felt
for his dagger till his hand gripped it. Then he spoke.

“Who is that?”

For long there was no answer: then again the knock.

“Who are you?”

No answer.

He was thrilled, and he loved being thrilled. In two strides he reached
the door. Unlike Slightly’s door, it filled the aperture, so that he
could not see beyond it, nor could the one knocking see him.

“I won’t open unless you speak,” Peter cried.

Then at last the visitor spoke, in a lovely bell-like voice.

“Let me in, Peter.”

It was Tink, and quickly he unbarred to her. She flew in excitedly, her
face flushed and her dress stained with mud.

“What is it?”

“Oh, you could never guess!” she cried, and offered him three guesses.
“Out with it!” he shouted, and in one ungrammatical sentence, as long
as the ribbons that conjurers pull from their mouths, she told of the
capture of Wendy and the boys.

Peter’s heart bobbed up and down as he listened. Wendy bound, and on
the pirate ship; she who loved everything to be just so!

“I’ll rescue her!” he cried, leaping at his weapons. As he leapt he
thought of something he could do to please her. He could take his
medicine.

His hand closed on the fatal draught.

“No!” shrieked Tinker Bell, who had heard Hook mutter about his deed as
he sped through the forest.

“Why not?”

“It is poisoned.”

“Poisoned? Who could have poisoned it?”

“Hook.”

“Don’t be silly. How could Hook have got down here?”

Alas, Tinker Bell could not explain this, for even she did not know the
dark secret of Slightly’s tree. Nevertheless Hook’s words had left no
room for doubt. The cup was poisoned.

“Besides,” said Peter, quite believing himself, “I never fell asleep.”

He raised the cup. No time for words now; time for deeds; and with one
of her lightning movements Tink got between his lips and the draught,
and drained it to the dregs.

“Why, Tink, how dare you drink my medicine?”

But she did not answer. Already she was reeling in the air.

“What is the matter with you?” cried Peter, suddenly afraid.

“It was poisoned, Peter,” she told him softly; “and now I am going to
be dead.”

“O Tink, did you drink it to save me?”

“Yes.”

“But why, Tink?”

Her wings would scarcely carry her now, but in reply she alighted on
his shoulder and gave his nose a loving bite. She whispered in his ear
“You silly ass,” and then, tottering to her chamber, lay down on the
bed.

His head almost filled the fourth wall of her little room as he knelt
near her in distress. Every moment her light was growing fainter; and
he knew that if it went out she would be no more. She liked his tears
so much that she put out her beautiful finger and let them run over it.

Her voice was so low that at first he could not make out what she said.
Then he made it out. She was saying that she thought she could get well
again if children believed in fairies.

Peter flung out his arms. There were no children there, and it was
night time; but he addressed all who might be dreaming of the
Neverland, and who were therefore nearer to him than you think: boys
and girls in their nighties, and naked papooses in their baskets hung
from trees.

“Do you believe?” he cried.

Tink sat up in bed almost briskly to listen to her fate.

She fancied she heard answers in the affirmative, and then again she
wasn’t sure.

“What do you think?” she asked Peter.

“If you believe,” he shouted to them, “clap your hands; don’t let Tink
die.”

Many clapped.

Some didn’t.

A few beasts hissed.

The clapping stopped suddenly; as if countless mothers had rushed to
their nurseries to see what on earth was happening; but already Tink
was saved. First her voice grew strong, then she popped out of bed,
then she was flashing through the room more merry and impudent than
ever. She never thought of thanking those who believed, but she would
have liked to get at the ones who had hissed.

“And now to rescue Wendy!”

The moon was riding in a cloudy heaven when Peter rose from his tree,
begirt with weapons and wearing little else, to set out upon his
perilous quest. It was not such a night as he would have chosen. He had
hoped to fly, keeping not far from the ground so that nothing unwonted
should escape his eyes; but in that fitful light to have flown low
would have meant trailing his shadow through the trees, thus disturbing
birds and acquainting a watchful foe that he was astir.

He regretted now that he had given the birds of the island such strange
names that they are very wild and difficult of approach.

There was no other course but to press forward in redskin fashion, at
which happily he was an adept. But in what direction, for he could not
be sure that the children had been taken to the ship? A light fall of
snow had obliterated all footmarks; and a deathly silence pervaded the
island, as if for a space Nature stood still in horror of the recent
carnage. He had taught the children something of the forest lore that
he had himself learned from Tiger Lily and Tinker Bell, and knew that
in their dire hour they were not likely to forget it. Slightly, if he
had an opportunity, would blaze the trees, for instance, Curly would
drop seeds, and Wendy would leave her handkerchief at some important
place. The morning was needed to search for such guidance, and he could
not wait. The upper world had called him, but would give no help.

The crocodile passed him, but not another living thing, not a sound,
not a movement; and yet he knew well that sudden death might be at the
next tree, or stalking him from behind.

He swore this terrible oath: “Hook or me this time.”

Now he crawled forward like a snake, and again erect, he darted across
a space on which the moonlight played, one finger on his lip and his
dagger at the ready. He was frightfully happy.




Chapter XIV.
THE PIRATE SHIP


One green light squinting over Kidd’s Creek, which is near the mouth of
the pirate river, marked where the brig, the _Jolly Roger_, lay, low in
the water; a rakish-looking craft foul to the hull, every beam in her
detestable, like ground strewn with mangled feathers. She was the
cannibal of the seas, and scarce needed that watchful eye, for she
floated immune in the horror of her name.

She was wrapped in the blanket of night, through which no sound from
her could have reached the shore. There was little sound, and none
agreeable save the whir of the ship’s sewing machine at which Smee sat,
ever industrious and obliging, the essence of the commonplace, pathetic
Smee. I know not why he was so infinitely pathetic, unless it were
because he was so pathetically unaware of it; but even strong men had
to turn hastily from looking at him, and more than once on summer
evenings he had touched the fount of Hook’s tears and made it flow. Of
this, as of almost everything else, Smee was quite unconscious.

A few of the pirates leant over the bulwarks, drinking in the miasma of
the night; others sprawled by barrels over games of dice and cards; and
the exhausted four who had carried the little house lay prone on the
deck, where even in their sleep they rolled skillfully to this side or
that out of Hook’s reach, lest he should claw them mechanically in
passing.

Hook trod the deck in thought. O man unfathomable. It was his hour of
triumph. Peter had been removed for ever from his path, and all the
other boys were in the brig, about to walk the plank. It was his
grimmest deed since the days when he had brought Barbecue to heel; and
knowing as we do how vain a tabernacle is man, could we be surprised
had he now paced the deck unsteadily, bellied out by the winds of his
success?

But there was no elation in his gait, which kept pace with the action
of his sombre mind. Hook was profoundly dejected.

He was often thus when communing with himself on board ship in the
quietude of the night. It was because he was so terribly alone. This
inscrutable man never felt more alone than when surrounded by his dogs.
They were socially inferior to him.

Hook was not his true name. To reveal who he really was would even at
this date set the country in a blaze; but as those who read between the
lines must already have guessed, he had been at a famous public school;
and its traditions still clung to him like garments, with which indeed
they are largely concerned. Thus it was offensive to him even now to
board a ship in the same dress in which he grappled her, and he still
adhered in his walk to the school’s distinguished slouch. But above all
he retained the passion for good form.

Good form! However much he may have degenerated, he still knew that
this is all that really matters.

From far within him he heard a creaking as of rusty portals, and
through them came a stern tap-tap-tap, like hammering in the night when
one cannot sleep. “Have you been good form to-day?” was their eternal
question.

“Fame, fame, that glittering bauble, it is mine,” he cried.

“Is it quite good form to be distinguished at anything?” the tap-tap
from his school replied.

“I am the only man whom Barbecue feared,” he urged, “and Flint feared
Barbecue.”

“Barbecue, Flint—what house?” came the cutting retort.

Most disquieting reflection of all, was it not bad form to think about
good form?

His vitals were tortured by this problem. It was a claw within him
sharper than the iron one; and as it tore him, the perspiration dripped
down his tallow countenance and streaked his doublet. Ofttimes he drew
his sleeve across his face, but there was no damming that trickle.

Ah, envy not Hook.

There came to him a presentiment of his early dissolution. It was as if
Peter’s terrible oath had boarded the ship. Hook felt a gloomy desire
to make his dying speech, lest presently there should be no time for
it.

“Better for Hook,” he cried, “if he had had less ambition!” It was in
his darkest hours only that he referred to himself in the third person.

“No little children to love me!”

Strange that he should think of this, which had never troubled him
before; perhaps the sewing machine brought it to his mind. For long he
muttered to himself, staring at Smee, who was hemming placidly, under
the conviction that all children feared him.

Feared him! Feared Smee! There was not a child on board the brig that
night who did not already love him. He had said horrid things to them
and hit them with the palm of his hand, because he could not hit with
his fist, but they had only clung to him the more. Michael had tried on
his spectacles.

To tell poor Smee that they thought him lovable! Hook itched to do it,
but it seemed too brutal. Instead, he revolved this mystery in his
mind: why do they find Smee lovable? He pursued the problem like the
sleuth-hound that he was. If Smee was lovable, what was it that made
him so? A terrible answer suddenly presented itself—“Good form?”

Had the bo’sun good form without knowing it, which is the best form of
all?

He remembered that you have to prove you don’t know you have it before
you are eligible for Pop.

With a cry of rage he raised his iron hand over Smee’s head; but he did
not tear. What arrested him was this reflection:

“To claw a man because he is good form, what would that be?”

“Bad form!”

The unhappy Hook was as impotent as he was damp, and he fell forward
like a cut flower.

His dogs thinking him out of the way for a time, discipline instantly
relaxed; and they broke into a bacchanalian dance, which brought him to
his feet at once, all traces of human weakness gone, as if a bucket of
water had passed over him.

“Quiet, you scugs,” he cried, “or I’ll cast anchor in you;” and at once
the din was hushed. “Are all the children chained, so that they cannot
fly away?”

“Ay, ay.”

“Then hoist them up.”

The wretched prisoners were dragged from the hold, all except Wendy,
and ranged in line in front of him. For a time he seemed unconscious of
their presence. He lolled at his ease, humming, not unmelodiously,
snatches of a rude song, and fingering a pack of cards. Ever and anon
the light from his cigar gave a touch of colour to his face.

“Now then, bullies,” he said briskly, “six of you walk the plank
to-night, but I have room for two cabin boys. Which of you is it to
be?”

“Don’t irritate him unnecessarily,” had been Wendy’s instructions in
the hold; so Tootles stepped forward politely. Tootles hated the idea
of signing under such a man, but an instinct told him that it would be
prudent to lay the responsibility on an absent person; and though a
somewhat silly boy, he knew that mothers alone are always willing to be
the buffer. All children know this about mothers, and despise them for
it, but make constant use of it.

So Tootles explained prudently, “You see, sir, I don’t think my mother
would like me to be a pirate. Would your mother like you to be a
pirate, Slightly?”

He winked at Slightly, who said mournfully, “I don’t think so,” as if
he wished things had been otherwise. “Would your mother like you to be
a pirate, Twin?”

“I don’t think so,” said the first twin, as clever as the others.
“Nibs, would—”

“Stow this gab,” roared Hook, and the spokesmen were dragged back.
“You, boy,” he said, addressing John, “you look as if you had a little
pluck in you. Didst never want to be a pirate, my hearty?”

Now John had sometimes experienced this hankering at maths. prep.; and
he was struck by Hook’s picking him out.

“I once thought of calling myself Red-handed Jack,” he said
diffidently.

“And a good name too. We’ll call you that here, bully, if you join.”

“What do you think, Michael?” asked John.

“What would you call me if I join?” Michael demanded.

“Blackbeard Joe.”

Michael was naturally impressed. “What do you think, John?” He wanted
John to decide, and John wanted him to decide.

“Shall we still be respectful subjects of the King?” John inquired.

Through Hook’s teeth came the answer: “You would have to swear, ‘Down
with the King.’”

Perhaps John had not behaved very well so far, but he shone out now.

“Then I refuse,” he cried, banging the barrel in front of Hook.

“And I refuse,” cried Michael.

“Rule Britannia!” squeaked Curly.

The infuriated pirates buffeted them in the mouth; and Hook roared out,
“That seals your doom. Bring up their mother. Get the plank ready.”

They were only boys, and they went white as they saw Jukes and Cecco
preparing the fatal plank. But they tried to look brave when Wendy was
brought up.

No words of mine can tell you how Wendy despised those pirates. To the
boys there was at least some glamour in the pirate calling; but all
that she saw was that the ship had not been tidied for years. There was
not a porthole on the grimy glass of which you might not have written
with your finger “Dirty pig”; and she had already written it on
several. But as the boys gathered round her she had no thought, of
course, save for them.

“So, my beauty,” said Hook, as if he spoke in syrup, “you are to see
your children walk the plank.”

Fine gentlemen though he was, the intensity of his communings had
soiled his ruff, and suddenly he knew that she was gazing at it. With a
hasty gesture he tried to hide it, but he was too late.

“Are they to die?” asked Wendy, with a look of such frightful contempt
that he nearly fainted.

“They are,” he snarled. “Silence all,” he called gloatingly, “for a
mother’s last words to her children.”

At this moment Wendy was grand. “These are my last words, dear boys,”
she said firmly. “I feel that I have a message to you from your real
mothers, and it is this: ‘We hope our sons will die like English
gentlemen.’”

Even the pirates were awed, and Tootles cried out hysterically, “I am
going to do what my mother hopes. What are you to do, Nibs?”

“What my mother hopes. What are you to do, Twin?”

“What my mother hopes. John, what are—”

But Hook had found his voice again.

“Tie her up!” he shouted.

It was Smee who tied her to the mast. “See here, honey,” he whispered,
“I’ll save you if you promise to be my mother.”

But not even for Smee would she make such a promise. “I would almost
rather have no children at all,” she said disdainfully.

It is sad to know that not a boy was looking at her as Smee tied her to
the mast; the eyes of all were on the plank: that last little walk they
were about to take. They were no longer able to hope that they would
walk it manfully, for the capacity to think had gone from them; they
could stare and shiver only.

Hook smiled on them with his teeth closed, and took a step toward
Wendy. His intention was to turn her face so that she should see the
boys walking the plank one by one. But he never reached her, he never
heard the cry of anguish he hoped to wring from her. He heard something
else instead.

It was the terrible tick-tick of the crocodile.

They all heard it—pirates, boys, Wendy; and immediately every head was
blown in one direction; not to the water whence the sound proceeded,
but toward Hook. All knew that what was about to happen concerned him
alone, and that from being actors they were suddenly become spectators.

Very frightful was it to see the change that came over him. It was as
if he had been clipped at every joint. He fell in a little heap.

The sound came steadily nearer; and in advance of it came this ghastly
thought, “The crocodile is about to board the ship!”

Even the iron claw hung inactive; as if knowing that it was no
intrinsic part of what the attacking force wanted. Left so fearfully
alone, any other man would have lain with his eyes shut where he fell:
but the gigantic brain of Hook was still working, and under its
guidance he crawled on the knees along the deck as far from the sound
as he could go. The pirates respectfully cleared a passage for him, and
it was only when he brought up against the bulwarks that he spoke.

“Hide me!” he cried hoarsely.

They gathered round him, all eyes averted from the thing that was
coming aboard. They had no thought of fighting it. It was Fate.

Only when Hook was hidden from them did curiosity loosen the limbs of
the boys so that they could rush to the ship’s side to see the
crocodile climbing it. Then they got the strangest surprise of the
Night of Nights; for it was no crocodile that was coming to their aid.
It was Peter.

He signed to them not to give vent to any cry of admiration that might
rouse suspicion. Then he went on ticking.




Chapter XV.
“HOOK OR ME THIS TIME”


Odd things happen to all of us on our way through life without our
noticing for a time that they have happened. Thus, to take an instance,
we suddenly discover that we have been deaf in one ear for we don’t
know how long, but, say, half an hour. Now such an experience had come
that night to Peter. When last we saw him he was stealing across the
island with one finger to his lips and his dagger at the ready. He had
seen the crocodile pass by without noticing anything peculiar about it,
but by and by he remembered that it had not been ticking. At first he
thought this eerie, but soon concluded rightly that the clock had run
down.

Without giving a thought to what might be the feelings of a
fellow-creature thus abruptly deprived of its closest companion, Peter
began to consider how he could turn the catastrophe to his own use; and
he decided to tick, so that wild beasts should believe he was the
crocodile and let him pass unmolested. He ticked superbly, but with one
unforeseen result. The crocodile was among those who heard the sound,
and it followed him, though whether with the purpose of regaining what
it had lost, or merely as a friend under the belief that it was again
ticking itself, will never be certainly known, for, like slaves to a
fixed idea, it was a stupid beast.

Peter reached the shore without mishap, and went straight on, his legs
encountering the water as if quite unaware that they had entered a new
element. Thus many animals pass from land to water, but no other human
of whom I know. As he swam he had but one thought: “Hook or me this
time.” He had ticked so long that he now went on ticking without
knowing that he was doing it. Had he known he would have stopped, for
to board the brig by help of the tick, though an ingenious idea, had
not occurred to him.

On the contrary, he thought he had scaled her side as noiseless as a
mouse; and he was amazed to see the pirates cowering from him, with
Hook in their midst as abject as if he had heard the crocodile.

The crocodile! No sooner did Peter remember it than he heard the
ticking. At first he thought the sound did come from the crocodile, and
he looked behind him swiftly. Then he realised that he was doing it
himself, and in a flash he understood the situation. “How clever of
me!” he thought at once, and signed to the boys not to burst into
applause.

It was at this moment that Ed Teynte the quartermaster emerged from the
forecastle and came along the deck. Now, reader, time what happened by
your watch. Peter struck true and deep. John clapped his hands on the
ill-fated pirate’s mouth to stifle the dying groan. He fell forward.
Four boys caught him to prevent the thud. Peter gave the signal, and
the carrion was cast overboard. There was a splash, and then silence.
How long has it taken?

“One!” (Slightly had begun to count.)

None too soon, Peter, every inch of him on tiptoe, vanished into the
cabin; for more than one pirate was screwing up his courage to look
round. They could hear each other’s distressed breathing now, which
showed them that the more terrible sound had passed.

“It’s gone, captain,” Smee said, wiping off his spectacles. “All’s
still again.”

Slowly Hook let his head emerge from his ruff, and listened so intently
that he could have caught the echo of the tick. There was not a sound,
and he drew himself up firmly to his full height.

“Then here’s to Johnny Plank!” he cried brazenly, hating the boys more
than ever because they had seen him unbend. He broke into the
villainous ditty:

“Yo ho, yo ho, the frisky plank,
    You walks along it so,
Till it goes down and you goes down
    To Davy Jones below!”

To terrorise the prisoners the more, though with a certain loss of
dignity, he danced along an imaginary plank, grimacing at them as he
sang; and when he finished he cried, “Do you want a touch of the cat
before you walk the plank?”

At that they fell on their knees. “No, no!” they cried so piteously
that every pirate smiled.

“Fetch the cat, Jukes,” said Hook; “it’s in the cabin.”

The cabin! Peter was in the cabin! The children gazed at each other.

“Ay, ay,” said Jukes blithely, and he strode into the cabin. They
followed him with their eyes; they scarce knew that Hook had resumed
his song, his dogs joining in with him:

“Yo ho, yo ho, the scratching cat,
    Its tails are nine, you know,
And when they’re writ upon your back—”

What was the last line will never be known, for of a sudden the song
was stayed by a dreadful screech from the cabin. It wailed through the
ship, and died away. Then was heard a crowing sound which was well
understood by the boys, but to the pirates was almost more eerie than
the screech.

“What was that?” cried Hook.

“Two,” said Slightly solemnly.

The Italian Cecco hesitated for a moment and then swung into the cabin.
He tottered out, haggard.

“What’s the matter with Bill Jukes, you dog?” hissed Hook, towering
over him.

“The matter wi’ him is he’s dead, stabbed,” replied Cecco in a hollow
voice.

“Bill Jukes dead!” cried the startled pirates.

“The cabin’s as black as a pit,” Cecco said, almost gibbering, “but
there is something terrible in there: the thing you heard crowing.”

The exultation of the boys, the lowering looks of the pirates, both
were seen by Hook.

“Cecco,” he said in his most steely voice, “go back and fetch me out
that doodle-doo.”

Cecco, bravest of the brave, cowered before his captain, crying “No,
no”; but Hook was purring to his claw.

“Did you say you would go, Cecco?” he said musingly.

Cecco went, first flinging his arms despairingly. There was no more
singing, all listened now; and again came a death-screech and again a
crow.

No one spoke except Slightly. “Three,” he said.

Hook rallied his dogs with a gesture. “’S’death and odds fish,” he
thundered, “who is to bring me that doodle-doo?”

“Wait till Cecco comes out,” growled Starkey, and the others took up
the cry.

“I think I heard you volunteer, Starkey,” said Hook, purring again.

“No, by thunder!” Starkey cried.

“My hook thinks you did,” said Hook, crossing to him. “I wonder if it
would not be advisable, Starkey, to humour the hook?”

“I’ll swing before I go in there,” replied Starkey doggedly, and again
he had the support of the crew.

“Is this mutiny?” asked Hook more pleasantly than ever. “Starkey’s
ringleader!”

“Captain, mercy!” Starkey whimpered, all of a tremble now.

“Shake hands, Starkey,” said Hook, proffering his claw.

Starkey looked round for help, but all deserted him. As he backed up
Hook advanced, and now the red spark was in his eye. With a despairing
scream the pirate leapt upon Long Tom and precipitated himself into the
sea.

“Four,” said Slightly.

“And now,” Hook said courteously, “did any other gentlemen say mutiny?”
Seizing a lantern and raising his claw with a menacing gesture, “I’ll
bring out that doodle-doo myself,” he said, and sped into the cabin.

“Five.” How Slightly longed to say it. He wetted his lips to be ready,
but Hook came staggering out, without his lantern.

“Something blew out the light,” he said a little unsteadily.

“Something!” echoed Mullins.

“What of Cecco?” demanded Noodler.

“He’s as dead as Jukes,” said Hook shortly.

His reluctance to return to the cabin impressed them all unfavourably,
and the mutinous sounds again broke forth. All pirates are
superstitious, and Cookson cried, “They do say the surest sign a ship’s
accurst is when there’s one on board more than can be accounted for.”

“I’ve heard,” muttered Mullins, “he always boards the pirate craft
last. Had he a tail, captain?”

“They say,” said another, looking viciously at Hook, “that when he
comes it’s in the likeness of the wickedest man aboard.”

“Had he a hook, captain?” asked Cookson insolently; and one after
another took up the cry, “The ship’s doomed!” At this the children
could not resist raising a cheer. Hook had well-nigh forgotten his
prisoners, but as he swung round on them now his face lit up again.

“Lads,” he cried to his crew, “now here’s a notion. Open the cabin door
and drive them in. Let them fight the doodle-doo for their lives. If
they kill him, we’re so much the better; if he kills them, we’re none
the worse.”

For the last time his dogs admired Hook, and devotedly they did his
bidding. The boys, pretending to struggle, were pushed into the cabin
and the door was closed on them.

“Now, listen!” cried Hook, and all listened. But not one dared to face
the door. Yes, one, Wendy, who all this time had been bound to the
mast. It was for neither a scream nor a crow that she was watching, it
was for the reappearance of Peter.

She had not long to wait. In the cabin he had found the thing for which
he had gone in search: the key that would free the children of their
manacles, and now they all stole forth, armed with such weapons as they
could find. First signing them to hide, Peter cut Wendy’s bonds, and
then nothing could have been easier than for them all to fly off
together; but one thing barred the way, an oath, “Hook or me this
time.” So when he had freed Wendy, he whispered for her to conceal
herself with the others, and himself took her place by the mast, her
cloak around him so that he should pass for her. Then he took a great
breath and crowed.

To the pirates it was a voice crying that all the boys lay slain in the
cabin; and they were panic-stricken. Hook tried to hearten them; but
like the dogs he had made them they showed him their fangs, and he knew
that if he took his eyes off them now they would leap at him.

“Lads,” he said, ready to cajole or strike as need be, but never
quailing for an instant, “I’ve thought it out. There’s a Jonah aboard.”

“Ay,” they snarled, “a man wi’ a hook.”

“No, lads, no, it’s the girl. Never was luck on a pirate ship wi’ a
woman on board. We’ll right the ship when she’s gone.”

Some of them remembered that this had been a saying of Flint’s. “It’s
worth trying,” they said doubtfully.

“Fling the girl overboard,” cried Hook; and they made a rush at the
figure in the cloak.

“There’s none can save you now, missy,” Mullins hissed jeeringly.

“There’s one,” replied the figure.

“Who’s that?”

“Peter Pan the avenger!” came the terrible answer; and as he spoke
Peter flung off his cloak. Then they all knew who ’twas that had been
undoing them in the cabin, and twice Hook essayed to speak and twice he
failed. In that frightful moment I think his fierce heart broke.

At last he cried, “Cleave him to the brisket!” but without conviction.

“Down, boys, and at them!” Peter’s voice rang out; and in another
moment the clash of arms was resounding through the ship. Had the
pirates kept together it is certain that they would have won; but the
onset came when they were still unstrung, and they ran hither and
thither, striking wildly, each thinking himself the last survivor of
the crew. Man to man they were the stronger; but they fought on the
defensive only, which enabled the boys to hunt in pairs and choose
their quarry. Some of the miscreants leapt into the sea; others hid in
dark recesses, where they were found by Slightly, who did not fight,
but ran about with a lantern which he flashed in their faces, so that
they were half blinded and fell as an easy prey to the reeking swords
of the other boys. There was little sound to be heard but the clang of
weapons, an occasional screech or splash, and Slightly monotonously
counting—five—six—seven—eight—nine—ten—eleven.

I think all were gone when a group of savage boys surrounded Hook, who
seemed to have a charmed life, as he kept them at bay in that circle of
fire. They had done for his dogs, but this man alone seemed to be a
match for them all. Again and again they closed upon him, and again and
again he hewed a clear space. He had lifted up one boy with his hook,
and was using him as a buckler, when another, who had just passed his
sword through Mullins, sprang into the fray.

“Put up your swords, boys,” cried the newcomer, “this man is mine.”

Thus suddenly Hook found himself face to face with Peter. The others
drew back and formed a ring around them.

For long the two enemies looked at one another, Hook shuddering
slightly, and Peter with the strange smile upon his face.

“So, Pan,” said Hook at last, “this is all your doing.”

“Ay, James Hook,” came the stern answer, “it is all my doing.”

“Proud and insolent youth,” said Hook, “prepare to meet thy doom.”

“Dark and sinister man,” Peter answered, “have at thee.”

Without more words they fell to, and for a space there was no advantage
to either blade. Peter was a superb swordsman, and parried with
dazzling rapidity; ever and anon he followed up a feint with a lunge
that got past his foe’s defence, but his shorter reach stood him in ill
stead, and he could not drive the steel home. Hook, scarcely his
inferior in brilliancy, but not quite so nimble in wrist play, forced
him back by the weight of his onset, hoping suddenly to end all with a
favourite thrust, taught him long ago by Barbecue at Rio; but to his
astonishment he found this thrust turned aside again and again. Then he
sought to close and give the quietus with his iron hook, which all this
time had been pawing the air; but Peter doubled under it and, lunging
fiercely, pierced him in the ribs. At the sight of his own blood, whose
peculiar colour, you remember, was offensive to him, the sword fell
from Hook’s hand, and he was at Peter’s mercy.

“Now!” cried all the boys, but with a magnificent gesture Peter invited
his opponent to pick up his sword. Hook did so instantly, but with a
tragic feeling that Peter was showing good form.

Hitherto he had thought it was some fiend fighting him, but darker
suspicions assailed him now.

“Pan, who and what art thou?” he cried huskily.

“I’m youth, I’m joy,” Peter answered at a venture, “I’m a little bird
that has broken out of the egg.”

This, of course, was nonsense; but it was proof to the unhappy Hook
that Peter did not know in the least who or what he was, which is the
very pinnacle of good form.

“To’t again,” he cried despairingly.

He fought now like a human flail, and every sweep of that terrible
sword would have severed in twain any man or boy who obstructed it; but
Peter fluttered round him as if the very wind it made blew him out of
the danger zone. And again and again he darted in and pricked.

Hook was fighting now without hope. That passionate breast no longer
asked for life; but for one boon it craved: to see Peter show bad form
before it was cold forever.

Abandoning the fight he rushed into the powder magazine and fired it.

“In two minutes,” he cried, “the ship will be blown to pieces.”

Now, now, he thought, true form will show.

But Peter issued from the powder magazine with the shell in his hands,
and calmly flung it overboard.

What sort of form was Hook himself showing? Misguided man though he
was, we may be glad, without sympathising with him, that in the end he
was true to the traditions of his race. The other boys were flying
around him now, flouting, scornful; and he staggered about the deck
striking up at them impotently, his mind was no longer with them; it
was slouching in the playing fields of long ago, or being sent up for
good, or watching the wall-game from a famous wall. And his shoes were
right, and his waistcoat was right, and his tie was right, and his
socks were right.

James Hook, thou not wholly unheroic figure, farewell.

For we have come to his last moment.

Seeing Peter slowly advancing upon him through the air with dagger
poised, he sprang upon the bulwarks to cast himself into the sea. He
did not know that the crocodile was waiting for him; for we purposely
stopped the clock that this knowledge might be spared him: a little
mark of respect from us at the end.

He had one last triumph, which I think we need not grudge him. As he
stood on the bulwark looking over his shoulder at Peter gliding through
the air, he invited him with a gesture to use his foot. It made Peter
kick instead of stab.

At last Hook had got the boon for which he craved.

“Bad form,” he cried jeeringly, and went content to the crocodile.

Thus perished James Hook.

“Seventeen,” Slightly sang out; but he was not quite correct in his
figures. Fifteen paid the penalty for their crimes that night; but two
reached the shore: Starkey to be captured by the redskins, who made him
nurse for all their papooses, a melancholy come-down for a pirate; and
Smee, who henceforth wandered about the world in his spectacles, making
a precarious living by saying he was the only man that Jas. Hook had
feared.

Wendy, of course, had stood by taking no part in the fight, though
watching Peter with glistening eyes; but now that all was over she
became prominent again. She praised them equally, and shuddered
delightfully when Michael showed her the place where he had killed one;
and then she took them into Hook’s cabin and pointed to his watch which
was hanging on a nail. It said “half-past one!”

The lateness of the hour was almost the biggest thing of all. She got
them to bed in the pirates’ bunks pretty quickly, you may be sure; all
but Peter, who strutted up and down on the deck, until at last he fell
asleep by the side of Long Tom. He had one of his dreams that night,
and cried in his sleep for a long time, and Wendy held him tightly.




Chapter XVI.
THE RETURN HOME


By three bells that morning they were all stirring their stumps; for
there was a big sea running; and Tootles, the bo’sun, was among them,
with a rope’s end in his hand and chewing tobacco. They all donned
pirate clothes cut off at the knee, shaved smartly, and tumbled up,
with the true nautical roll and hitching their trousers.

It need not be said who was the captain. Nibs and John were first and
second mate. There was a woman aboard. The rest were tars before the
mast, and lived in the fo’c’sle. Peter had already lashed himself to
the wheel; but he piped all hands and delivered a short address to
them; said he hoped they would do their duty like gallant hearties, but
that he knew they were the scum of Rio and the Gold Coast, and if they
snapped at him he would tear them. The bluff strident words struck the
note sailors understood, and they cheered him lustily. Then a few sharp
orders were given, and they turned the ship round, and nosed her for
the mainland.

Captain Pan calculated, after consulting the ship’s chart, that if this
weather lasted they should strike the Azores about the 21st of June,
after which it would save time to fly.

Some of them wanted it to be an honest ship and others were in favour
of keeping it a pirate; but the captain treated them as dogs, and they
dared not express their wishes to him even in a round robin. Instant
obedience was the only safe thing. Slightly got a dozen for looking
perplexed when told to take soundings. The general feeling was that
Peter was honest just now to lull Wendy’s suspicions, but that there
might be a change when the new suit was ready, which, against her will,
she was making for him out of some of Hook’s wickedest garments. It was
afterwards whispered among them that on the first night he wore this
suit he sat long in the cabin with Hook’s cigar-holder in his mouth and
one hand clenched, all but for the forefinger, which he bent and held
threateningly aloft like a hook.

Instead of watching the ship, however, we must now return to that
desolate home from which three of our characters had taken heartless
flight so long ago. It seems a shame to have neglected No. 14 all this
time; and yet we may be sure that Mrs. Darling does not blame us. If we
had returned sooner to look with sorrowful sympathy at her, she would
probably have cried, “Don’t be silly; what do I matter? Do go back and
keep an eye on the children.” So long as mothers are like this their
children will take advantage of them; and they may lay to that.

Even now we venture into that familiar nursery only because its lawful
occupants are on their way home; we are merely hurrying on in advance
of them to see that their beds are properly aired and that Mr. and Mrs.
Darling do not go out for the evening. We are no more than servants.
Why on earth should their beds be properly aired, seeing that they left
them in such a thankless hurry? Would it not serve them jolly well
right if they came back and found that their parents were spending the
week-end in the country? It would be the moral lesson they have been in
need of ever since we met them; but if we contrived things in this way
Mrs. Darling would never forgive us.

One thing I should like to do immensely, and that is to tell her, in
the way authors have, that the children are coming back, that indeed
they will be here on Thursday week. This would spoil so completely the
surprise to which Wendy and John and Michael are looking forward. They
have been planning it out on the ship: mother’s rapture, father’s shout
of joy, Nana’s leap through the air to embrace them first, when what
they ought to be prepared for is a good hiding. How delicious to spoil
it all by breaking the news in advance; so that when they enter grandly
Mrs. Darling may not even offer Wendy her mouth, and Mr. Darling may
exclaim pettishly, “Dash it all, here are those boys again.” However,
we should get no thanks even for this. We are beginning to know Mrs.
Darling by this time, and may be sure that she would upbraid us for
depriving the children of their little pleasure.

“But, my dear madam, it is ten days till Thursday week; so that by
telling you what’s what, we can save you ten days of unhappiness.”

“Yes, but at what a cost! By depriving the children of ten minutes of
delight.”

“Oh, if you look at it in that way!”

“What other way is there in which to look at it?”

You see, the woman had no proper spirit. I had meant to say
extraordinarily nice things about her; but I despise her, and not one
of them will I say now. She does not really need to be told to have
things ready, for they are ready. All the beds are aired, and she never
leaves the house, and observe, the window is open. For all the use we
are to her, we might well go back to the ship. However, as we are here
we may as well stay and look on. That is all we are, lookers-on. Nobody
really wants us. So let us watch and say jaggy things, in the hope that
some of them will hurt.

The only change to be seen in the night-nursery is that between nine
and six the kennel is no longer there. When the children flew away, Mr.
Darling felt in his bones that all the blame was his for having chained
Nana up, and that from first to last she had been wiser than he. Of
course, as we have seen, he was quite a simple man; indeed he might
have passed for a boy again if he had been able to take his baldness
off; but he had also a noble sense of justice and a lion’s courage to
do what seemed right to him; and having thought the matter out with
anxious care after the flight of the children, he went down on all
fours and crawled into the kennel. To all Mrs. Darling’s dear
invitations to him to come out he replied sadly but firmly:

“No, my own one, this is the place for me.”

In the bitterness of his remorse he swore that he would never leave the
kennel until his children came back. Of course this was a pity; but
whatever Mr. Darling did he had to do in excess, otherwise he soon gave
up doing it. And there never was a more humble man than the once proud
George Darling, as he sat in the kennel of an evening talking with his
wife of their children and all their pretty ways.

Very touching was his deference to Nana. He would not let her come into
the kennel, but on all other matters he followed her wishes implicitly.

Every morning the kennel was carried with Mr. Darling in it to a cab,
which conveyed him to his office, and he returned home in the same way
at six. Something of the strength of character of the man will be seen
if we remember how sensitive he was to the opinion of neighbours: this
man whose every movement now attracted surprised attention. Inwardly he
must have suffered torture; but he preserved a calm exterior even when
the young criticised his little home, and he always lifted his hat
courteously to any lady who looked inside.

It may have been Quixotic, but it was magnificent. Soon the inward
meaning of it leaked out, and the great heart of the public was
touched. Crowds followed the cab, cheering it lustily; charming girls
scaled it to get his autograph; interviews appeared in the better class
of papers, and society invited him to dinner and added, “Do come in the
kennel.”

On that eventful Thursday week, Mrs. Darling was in the night-nursery
awaiting George’s return home; a very sad-eyed woman. Now that we look
at her closely and remember the gaiety of her in the old days, all gone
now just because she has lost her babes, I find I won’t be able to say
nasty things about her after all. If she was too fond of her rubbishy
children, she couldn’t help it. Look at her in her chair, where she has
fallen asleep. The corner of her mouth, where one looks first, is
almost withered up. Her hand moves restlessly on her breast as if she
had a pain there. Some like Peter best, and some like Wendy best, but I
like her best. Suppose, to make her happy, we whisper to her in her
sleep that the brats are coming back. They are really within two miles
of the window now, and flying strong, but all we need whisper is that
they are on the way. Let’s.

It is a pity we did it, for she has started up, calling their names;
and there is no one in the room but Nana.

“O Nana, I dreamt my dear ones had come back.”

Nana had filmy eyes, but all she could do was put her paw gently on her
mistress’s lap; and they were sitting together thus when the kennel was
brought back. As Mr. Darling puts his head out to kiss his wife, we see
that his face is more worn than of yore, but has a softer expression.

He gave his hat to Liza, who took it scornfully; for she had no
imagination, and was quite incapable of understanding the motives of
such a man. Outside, the crowd who had accompanied the cab home were
still cheering, and he was naturally not unmoved.

“Listen to them,” he said; “it is very gratifying.”

“Lots of little boys,” sneered Liza.

“There were several adults to-day,” he assured her with a faint flush;
but when she tossed her head he had not a word of reproof for her.
Social success had not spoilt him; it had made him sweeter. For some
time he sat with his head out of the kennel, talking with Mrs. Darling
of this success, and pressing her hand reassuringly when she said she
hoped his head would not be turned by it.

“But if I had been a weak man,” he said. “Good heavens, if I had been a
weak man!”

“And, George,” she said timidly, “you are as full of remorse as ever,
aren’t you?”

“Full of remorse as ever, dearest! See my punishment: living in a
kennel.”

“But it is punishment, isn’t it, George? You are sure you are not
enjoying it?”

“My love!”

You may be sure she begged his pardon; and then, feeling drowsy, he
curled round in the kennel.

“Won’t you play me to sleep,” he asked, “on the nursery piano?” and as
she was crossing to the day-nursery he added thoughtlessly, “And shut
that window. I feel a draught.”

“O George, never ask me to do that. The window must always be left open
for them, always, always.”

Now it was his turn to beg her pardon; and she went into the
day-nursery and played, and soon he was asleep; and while he slept,
Wendy and John and Michael flew into the room.

Oh no. We have written it so, because that was the charming arrangement
planned by them before we left the ship; but something must have
happened since then, for it is not they who have flown in, it is Peter
and Tinker Bell.

Peter’s first words tell all.

“Quick Tink,” he whispered, “close the window; bar it! That’s right.
Now you and I must get away by the door; and when Wendy comes she will
think her mother has barred her out; and she will have to go back with
me.”

Now I understand what had hitherto puzzled me, why when Peter had
exterminated the pirates he did not return to the island and leave Tink
to escort the children to the mainland. This trick had been in his head
all the time.

Instead of feeling that he was behaving badly he danced with glee; then
he peeped into the day-nursery to see who was playing. He whispered to
Tink, “It’s Wendy’s mother! She is a pretty lady, but not so pretty as
my mother. Her mouth is full of thimbles, but not so full as my
mother’s was.”

Of course he knew nothing whatever about his mother; but he sometimes
bragged about her.

He did not know the tune, which was “Home, Sweet Home,” but he knew it
was saying, “Come back, Wendy, Wendy, Wendy”; and he cried exultantly,
“You will never see Wendy again, lady, for the window is barred!”

He peeped in again to see why the music had stopped, and now he saw
that Mrs. Darling had laid her head on the box, and that two tears were
sitting on her eyes.

“She wants me to unbar the window,” thought Peter, “but I won’t, not
I!”

He peeped again, and the tears were still there, or another two had
taken their place.

“She’s awfully fond of Wendy,” he said to himself. He was angry with
her now for not seeing why she could not have Wendy.

The reason was so simple: “I’m fond of her too. We can’t both have her,
lady.”

But the lady would not make the best of it, and he was unhappy. He
ceased to look at her, but even then she would not let go of him. He
skipped about and made funny faces, but when he stopped it was just as
if she were inside him, knocking.

“Oh, all right,” he said at last, and gulped. Then he unbarred the
window. “Come on, Tink,” he cried, with a frightful sneer at the laws
of nature; “we don’t want any silly mothers;” and he flew away.

Thus Wendy and John and Michael found the window open for them after
all, which of course was more than they deserved. They alighted on the
floor, quite unashamed of themselves, and the youngest one had already
forgotten his home.

“John,” he said, looking around him doubtfully, “I think I have been
here before.”

“Of course you have, you silly. There is your old bed.”

“So it is,” Michael said, but not with much conviction.

“I say,” cried John, “the kennel!” and he dashed across to look into
it.

“Perhaps Nana is inside it,” Wendy said.

But John whistled. “Hullo,” he said, “there’s a man inside it.”

“It’s father!” exclaimed Wendy.

“Let me see father,” Michael begged eagerly, and he took a good look.
“He is not so big as the pirate I killed,” he said with such frank
disappointment that I am glad Mr. Darling was asleep; it would have
been sad if those had been the first words he heard his little Michael
say.

Wendy and John had been taken aback somewhat at finding their father in
the kennel.

“Surely,” said John, like one who had lost faith in his memory, “he
used not to sleep in the kennel?”

“John,” Wendy said falteringly, “perhaps we don’t remember the old life
as well as we thought we did.”

A chill fell upon them; and serve them right.

“It is very careless of mother,” said that young scoundrel John, “not
to be here when we come back.”

It was then that Mrs. Darling began playing again.

“It’s mother!” cried Wendy, peeping.

“So it is!” said John.

“Then are you not really our mother, Wendy?” asked Michael, who was
surely sleepy.

“Oh dear!” exclaimed Wendy, with her first real twinge of remorse, “it
was quite time we came back.”

“Let us creep in,” John suggested, “and put our hands over her eyes.”

But Wendy, who saw that they must break the joyous news more gently,
had a better plan.

“Let us all slip into our beds, and be there when she comes in, just as
if we had never been away.”

And so when Mrs. Darling went back to the night-nursery to see if her
husband was asleep, all the beds were occupied. The children waited for
her cry of joy, but it did not come. She saw them, but she did not
believe they were there. You see, she saw them in their beds so often
in her dreams that she thought this was just the dream hanging around
her still.

She sat down in the chair by the fire, where in the old days she had
nursed them.

They could not understand this, and a cold fear fell upon all the three
of them.

“Mother!” Wendy cried.

“That’s Wendy,” she said, but still she was sure it was the dream.

“Mother!”

“That’s John,” she said.

“Mother!” cried Michael. He knew her now.

“That’s Michael,” she said, and she stretched out her arms for the
three little selfish children they would never envelop again. Yes, they
did, they went round Wendy and John and Michael, who had slipped out of
bed and run to her.

“George, George!” she cried when she could speak; and Mr. Darling woke
to share her bliss, and Nana came rushing in. There could not have been
a lovelier sight; but there was none to see it except a little boy who
was staring in at the window. He had had ecstasies innumerable that
other children can never know; but he was looking through the window at
the one joy from which he must be for ever barred.




Chapter XVII.
WHEN WENDY GREW UP


I hope you want to know what became of the other boys. They were
waiting below to give Wendy time to explain about them; and when they
had counted five hundred they went up. They went up by the stair,
because they thought this would make a better impression. They stood in
a row in front of Mrs. Darling, with their hats off, and wishing they
were not wearing their pirate clothes. They said nothing, but their
eyes asked her to have them. They ought to have looked at Mr. Darling
also, but they forgot about him.

Of course Mrs. Darling said at once that she would have them; but Mr.
Darling was curiously depressed, and they saw that he considered six a
rather large number.

“I must say,” he said to Wendy, “that you don’t do things by halves,” a
grudging remark which the twins thought was pointed at them.

The first twin was the proud one, and he asked, flushing, “Do you think
we should be too much of a handful, sir? Because, if so, we can go
away.”

“Father!” Wendy cried, shocked; but still the cloud was on him. He knew
he was behaving unworthily, but he could not help it.

“We could lie doubled up,” said Nibs.

“I always cut their hair myself,” said Wendy.

“George!” Mrs. Darling exclaimed, pained to see her dear one showing
himself in such an unfavourable light.

Then he burst into tears, and the truth came out. He was as glad to
have them as she was, he said, but he thought they should have asked
his consent as well as hers, instead of treating him as a cypher in his
own house.

“I don’t think he is a cypher,” Tootles cried instantly. “Do you think
he is a cypher, Curly?”

“No, I don’t. Do you think he is a cypher, Slightly?”

“Rather not. Twin, what do you think?”

It turned out that not one of them thought him a cypher; and he was
absurdly gratified, and said he would find space for them all in the
drawing-room if they fitted in.

“We’ll fit in, sir,” they assured him.

“Then follow the leader,” he cried gaily. “Mind you, I am not sure that
we have a drawing-room, but we pretend we have, and it’s all the same.
Hoop la!”

He went off dancing through the house, and they all cried “Hoop la!”
and danced after him, searching for the drawing-room; and I forget
whether they found it, but at any rate they found corners, and they all
fitted in.

As for Peter, he saw Wendy once again before he flew away. He did not
exactly come to the window, but he brushed against it in passing so
that she could open it if she liked and call to him. That is what she
did.

“Hullo, Wendy, good-bye,” he said.

“Oh dear, are you going away?”

“Yes.”

“You don’t feel, Peter,” she said falteringly, “that you would like to
say anything to my parents about a very sweet subject?”

“No.”

“About me, Peter?”

“No.”

Mrs. Darling came to the window, for at present she was keeping a sharp
eye on Wendy. She told Peter that she had adopted all the other boys,
and would like to adopt him also.

“Would you send me to school?” he inquired craftily.

“Yes.”

“And then to an office?”

“I suppose so.”

“Soon I would be a man?”

“Very soon.”

“I don’t want to go to school and learn solemn things,” he told her
passionately. “I don’t want to be a man. O Wendy’s mother, if I was to
wake up and feel there was a beard!”

“Peter,” said Wendy the comforter, “I should love you in a beard;” and
Mrs. Darling stretched out her arms to him, but he repulsed her.

“Keep back, lady, no one is going to catch me and make me a man.”

“But where are you going to live?”

“With Tink in the house we built for Wendy. The fairies are to put it
high up among the tree tops where they sleep at nights.”

“How lovely,” cried Wendy so longingly that Mrs. Darling tightened her
grip.

“I thought all the fairies were dead,” Mrs. Darling said.

“There are always a lot of young ones,” explained Wendy, who was now
quite an authority, “because you see when a new baby laughs for the
first time a new fairy is born, and as there are always new babies
there are always new fairies. They live in nests on the tops of trees;
and the mauve ones are boys and the white ones are girls, and the blue
ones are just little sillies who are not sure what they are.”

“I shall have such fun,” said Peter, with eye on Wendy.

“It will be rather lonely in the evening,” she said, “sitting by the
fire.”

“I shall have Tink.”

“Tink can’t go a twentieth part of the way round,” she reminded him a
little tartly.

“Sneaky tell-tale!” Tink called out from somewhere round the corner.

“It doesn’t matter,” Peter said.

“O Peter, you know it matters.”

“Well, then, come with me to the little house.”

“May I, mummy?”

“Certainly not. I have got you home again, and I mean to keep you.”

“But he does so need a mother.”

“So do you, my love.”

“Oh, all right,” Peter said, as if he had asked her from politeness
merely; but Mrs. Darling saw his mouth twitch, and she made this
handsome offer: to let Wendy go to him for a week every year to do his
spring cleaning. Wendy would have preferred a more permanent
arrangement; and it seemed to her that spring would be long in coming;
but this promise sent Peter away quite gay again. He had no sense of
time, and was so full of adventures that all I have told you about him
is only a halfpenny-worth of them. I suppose it was because Wendy knew
this that her last words to him were these rather plaintive ones:

“You won’t forget me, Peter, will you, before spring cleaning time
comes?”

Of course Peter promised; and then he flew away. He took Mrs. Darling’s
kiss with him. The kiss that had been for no one else, Peter took quite
easily. Funny. But she seemed satisfied.

Of course all the boys went to school; and most of them got into Class
III, but Slightly was put first into Class IV and then into Class V.
Class I is the top class. Before they had attended school a week they
saw what goats they had been not to remain on the island; but it was
too late now, and soon they settled down to being as ordinary as you or
me or Jenkins minor. It is sad to have to say that the power to fly
gradually left them. At first Nana tied their feet to the bed-posts so
that they should not fly away in the night; and one of their diversions
by day was to pretend to fall off buses; but by and by they ceased to
tug at their bonds in bed, and found that they hurt themselves when
they let go of the bus. In time they could not even fly after their
hats. Want of practice, they called it; but what it really meant was
that they no longer believed.

Michael believed longer than the other boys, though they jeered at him;
so he was with Wendy when Peter came for her at the end of the first
year. She flew away with Peter in the frock she had woven from leaves
and berries in the Neverland, and her one fear was that he might notice
how short it had become; but he never noticed, he had so much to say
about himself.

She had looked forward to thrilling talks with him about old times, but
new adventures had crowded the old ones from his mind.

“Who is Captain Hook?” he asked with interest when she spoke of the
arch enemy.

“Don’t you remember,” she asked, amazed, “how you killed him and saved
all our lives?”

“I forget them after I kill them,” he replied carelessly.

When she expressed a doubtful hope that Tinker Bell would be glad to
see her he said, “Who is Tinker Bell?”

“O Peter,” she said, shocked; but even when she explained he could not
remember.

“There are such a lot of them,” he said. “I expect she is no more.”

I expect he was right, for fairies don’t live long, but they are so
little that a short time seems a good while to them.

Wendy was pained too to find that the past year was but as yesterday to
Peter; it had seemed such a long year of waiting to her. But he was
exactly as fascinating as ever, and they had a lovely spring cleaning
in the little house on the tree tops.

Next year he did not come for her. She waited in a new frock because
the old one simply would not meet; but he never came.

“Perhaps he is ill,” Michael said.

“You know he is never ill.”

Michael came close to her and whispered, with a shiver, “Perhaps there
is no such person, Wendy!” and then Wendy would have cried if Michael
had not been crying.

Peter came next spring cleaning; and the strange thing was that he
never knew he had missed a year.

That was the last time the girl Wendy ever saw him. For a little longer
she tried for his sake not to have growing pains; and she felt she was
untrue to him when she got a prize for general knowledge. But the years
came and went without bringing the careless boy; and when they met
again Wendy was a married woman, and Peter was no more to her than a
little dust in the box in which she had kept her toys. Wendy was grown
up. You need not be sorry for her. She was one of the kind that likes
to grow up. In the end she grew up of her own free will a day quicker
than other girls.

All the boys were grown up and done for by this time; so it is scarcely
worth while saying anything more about them. You may see the twins and
Nibs and Curly any day going to an office, each carrying a little bag
and an umbrella. Michael is an engine-driver. Slightly married a lady
of title, and so he became a lord. You see that judge in a wig coming
out at the iron door? That used to be Tootles. The bearded man who
doesn’t know any story to tell his children was once John.

Wendy was married in white with a pink sash. It is strange to think
that Peter did not alight in the church and forbid the banns.

Years rolled on again, and Wendy had a daughter. This ought not to be
written in ink but in a golden splash.

She was called Jane, and always had an odd inquiring look, as if from
the moment she arrived on the mainland she wanted to ask questions.
When she was old enough to ask them they were mostly about Peter Pan.
She loved to hear of Peter, and Wendy told her all she could remember
in the very nursery from which the famous flight had taken place. It
was Jane’s nursery now, for her father had bought it at the three per
cents from Wendy’s father, who was no longer fond of stairs. Mrs.
Darling was now dead and forgotten.

There were only two beds in the nursery now, Jane’s and her nurse’s;
and there was no kennel, for Nana also had passed away. She died of old
age, and at the end she had been rather difficult to get on with; being
very firmly convinced that no one knew how to look after children
except herself.

Once a week Jane’s nurse had her evening off; and then it was Wendy’s
part to put Jane to bed. That was the time for stories. It was Jane’s
invention to raise the sheet over her mother’s head and her own, thus
making a tent, and in the awful darkness to whisper:

“What do we see now?”

“I don’t think I see anything to-night,” says Wendy, with a feeling
that if Nana were here she would object to further conversation.

“Yes, you do,” says Jane, “you see when you were a little girl.”

“That is a long time ago, sweetheart,” says Wendy. “Ah me, how time
flies!”

“Does it fly,” asks the artful child, “the way you flew when you were a
little girl?”

“The way I flew? Do you know, Jane, I sometimes wonder whether I ever
did really fly.”

“Yes, you did.”

“The dear old days when I could fly!”

“Why can’t you fly now, mother?”

“Because I am grown up, dearest. When people grow up they forget the
way.”

“Why do they forget the way?”

“Because they are no longer gay and innocent and heartless. It is only
the gay and innocent and heartless who can fly.”

“What is gay and innocent and heartless? I do wish I were gay and
innocent and heartless.”

Or perhaps Wendy admits she does see something.

“I do believe,” she says, “that it is this nursery.”

“I do believe it is,” says Jane. “Go on.”

They are now embarked on the great adventure of the night when Peter
flew in looking for his shadow.

“The foolish fellow,” says Wendy, “tried to stick it on with soap, and
when he could not he cried, and that woke me, and I sewed it on for
him.”

“You have missed a bit,” interrupts Jane, who now knows the story
better than her mother. “When you saw him sitting on the floor crying,
what did you say?”

“I sat up in bed and I said, ‘Boy, why are you crying?’”

“Yes, that was it,” says Jane, with a big breath.

“And then he flew us all away to the Neverland and the fairies and the
pirates and the redskins and the mermaids’ lagoon, and the home under
the ground, and the little house.”

“Yes! which did you like best of all?”

“I think I liked the home under the ground best of all.”

“Yes, so do I. What was the last thing Peter ever said to you?”

“The last thing he ever said to me was, ‘Just always be waiting for me,
and then some night you will hear me crowing.’”

“Yes.”

“But, alas, he forgot all about me,” Wendy said it with a smile. She
was as grown up as that.

“What did his crow sound like?” Jane asked one evening.

“It was like this,” Wendy said, trying to imitate Peter’s crow.

“No, it wasn’t,” Jane said gravely, “it was like this;” and she did it
ever so much better than her mother.

Wendy was a little startled. “My darling, how can you know?”

“I often hear it when I am sleeping,” Jane said.

“Ah yes, many girls hear it when they are sleeping, but I was the only
one who heard it awake.”

“Lucky you,” said Jane.

And then one night came the tragedy. It was the spring of the year, and
the story had been told for the night, and Jane was now asleep in her
bed. Wendy was sitting on the floor, very close to the fire, so as to
see to darn, for there was no other light in the nursery; and while she
sat darning she heard a crow. Then the window blew open as of old, and
Peter dropped in on the floor.

He was exactly the same as ever, and Wendy saw at once that he still
had all his first teeth.

He was a little boy, and she was grown up. She huddled by the fire not
daring to move, helpless and guilty, a big woman.

“Hullo, Wendy,” he said, not noticing any difference, for he was
thinking chiefly of himself; and in the dim light her white dress might
have been the nightgown in which he had seen her first.

“Hullo, Peter,” she replied faintly, squeezing herself as small as
possible. Something inside her was crying “Woman, Woman, let go of me.”

“Hullo, where is John?” he asked, suddenly missing the third bed.

“John is not here now,” she gasped.

“Is Michael asleep?” he asked, with a careless glance at Jane.

“Yes,” she answered; and now she felt that she was untrue to Jane as
well as to Peter.

“That is not Michael,” she said quickly, lest a judgment should fall on
her.

Peter looked. “Hullo, is it a new one?”

“Yes.”

“Boy or girl?”

“Girl.”

Now surely he would understand; but not a bit of it.

“Peter,” she said, faltering, “are you expecting me to fly away with
you?”

“Of course; that is why I have come.” He added a little sternly, “Have
you forgotten that this is spring cleaning time?”

She knew it was useless to say that he had let many spring cleaning
times pass.

“I can’t come,” she said apologetically, “I have forgotten how to fly.”

“I’ll soon teach you again.”

“O Peter, don’t waste the fairy dust on me.”

She had risen; and now at last a fear assailed him. “What is it?” he
cried, shrinking.

“I will turn up the light,” she said, “and then you can see for
yourself.”

For almost the only time in his life that I know of, Peter was afraid.
“Don’t turn up the light,” he cried.

She let her hands play in the hair of the tragic boy. She was not a
little girl heart-broken about him; she was a grown woman smiling at it
all, but they were wet-eyed smiles.

Then she turned up the light, and Peter saw. He gave a cry of pain; and
when the tall beautiful creature stooped to lift him in her arms he
drew back sharply.

“What is it?” he cried again.

She had to tell him.

“I am old, Peter. I am ever so much more than twenty. I grew up long
ago.”

“You promised not to!”

“I couldn’t help it. I am a married woman, Peter.”

“No, you’re not.”

“Yes, and the little girl in the bed is my baby.”

“No, she’s not.”

But he supposed she was; and he took a step towards the sleeping child
with his dagger upraised. Of course he did not strike. He sat down on
the floor instead and sobbed; and Wendy did not know how to comfort
him, though she could have done it so easily once. She was only a woman
now, and she ran out of the room to try to think.

Peter continued to cry, and soon his sobs woke Jane. She sat up in bed,
and was interested at once.

“Boy,” she said, “why are you crying?”

Peter rose and bowed to her, and she bowed to him from the bed.

“Hullo,” he said.

“Hullo,” said Jane.

“My name is Peter Pan,” he told her.

“Yes, I know.”

“I came back for my mother,” he explained, “to take her to the
Neverland.”

“Yes, I know,” Jane said, “I have been waiting for you.”

When Wendy returned diffidently she found Peter sitting on the bed-post
crowing gloriously, while Jane in her nighty was flying round the room
in solemn ecstasy.

“She is my mother,” Peter explained; and Jane descended and stood by
his side, with the look in her face that he liked to see on ladies when
they gazed at him.

“He does so need a mother,” Jane said.

“Yes, I know,” Wendy admitted rather forlornly; “no one knows it so
well as I.”

“Good-bye,” said Peter to Wendy; and he rose in the air, and the
shameless Jane rose with him; it was already her easiest way of moving
about.

Wendy rushed to the window.

“No, no,” she cried.

“It is just for spring cleaning time,” Jane said, “he wants me always
to do his spring cleaning.”

“If only I could go with you,” Wendy sighed.

“You see you can’t fly,” said Jane.

Of course in the end Wendy let them fly away together. Our last glimpse
of her shows her at the window, watching them receding into the sky
until they were as small as stars.

As you look at Wendy, you may see her hair becoming white, and her
figure little again, for all this happened long ago. Jane is now a
common grown-up, with a daughter called Margaret; and every spring
cleaning time, except when he forgets, Peter comes for Margaret and
takes her to the Neverland, where she tells him stories about himself,
to which he listens eagerly. When Margaret grows up she will have a
daughter, who is to be Peter’s mother in turn; and thus it will go on,
so long as children are gay and innocent and heartless.

THE END


CHAPTER I

MAGIC IN A MIST


That morning began no differently from any morning, though it was to be
the beginning of all things new for Eric. He was awakened early by Mrs.
Freg's rough hand shaking him by the arm, and her rough voice in his
ears: "Get up, lazy-bones! _All_ you boys pile out, this very minute!
It's six o'clock already!" Then she reached over Eric and shook the
other two boys in the bed with him, repeating and repeating "Wake up,
wake up! It's six o'clock already!" When she was sure the three boys in
the bed were awake and miserable, she crossed the room with a hurried,
heavy tread and clumped, clumped down the stairs into the kitchen.

Though it happened just that way every morning, and it had happened so
this morning, this day was to be very different from any other in Eric's
life. But Eric could not know that; so he crawled farther down under the
few bedclothes he had managed to keep to himself, and shut his eyes
again just for a minute.

The night had been a cold one, and the other two boys in the bed,
because they were older and stronger, had managed to keep most of the
bedding wrapped tightly around them, while little Eric shivered on the
very edge. So he had not slept at all in the way little boys of nine
usually sleep,--that is, when they have a bed to themselves, and their
mother has left a kiss with them. When he had slept, he had dreamed he
was wading in icy puddles out in the street.

But it was only a minute that he huddled there, trying to come really
awake, and then he sprang out, and without thought of a bath, was into
his clothes in a minute. The two older boys followed him more slowly,
yawning, growling, and quarreling.

Breakfast was served in the kitchen by Mrs. Freg. The room was bare and
ugly like the rest of the house, and the food was far from satisfying.
As the older boys got most of the bedding for themselves, so they got
most of the breakfast, while Mr. and Mrs. Freg laughed at them, and
praised them for fine, hearty boys who knew what they wanted and would
get it.

"You will succeed in the world, both of you," said Mrs. Freg with
mother-pride gleaming in her eyes, when they had managed to seize and
divide between them little Eric's steaming cup of coffee,--the only hot
thing he had hoped for that morning.

"Will I be a success, too?" asked Eric in a faint but hopeful voice.

"You!" said the harsh woman. "You, young man, had better be thankful to
work on at the canning instead of starving in the streets. That's the
fate of most orphans. Success indeed! Now hurry along, all of you. It's
quarter to seven."

But right here is where the day began to differ from other days. Eric
did not hurry along. He threw down his spoon and cried, "I'd just as
soon starve in the streets, and wade in its icy puddles, too, as live
here with you and your nasty boys and work in that old canning factory!
I just wonder how you'd feel if I went out this morning and never, never
came back! I'd like to do that!"

Mrs. Freg laughed, and her laugh was not a nice mother-laugh at all, for
she was not Eric's mother, and had never pretended that she was.

"Why, little spitfire, it wouldn't matter a bit except to make one less
mouth to feed. But you won't be so silly as that. You don't want to
starve."

"All right," said little Eric, snatching his cap from its peg. "You said
it wouldn't matter to you. You won't see me again, any of you. I hate
you all, and everything in the world. I hate you. You've made me hate
you hard!"

Then he suddenly ran out into the street.

In a minute he was in a flood of people, men, women and children moving
towards the canning factory, a big brick building on the outskirts of
the city. Eric had worked in that factory from the day he was seven.
There is no need to tell you what he did there, for this is not the
story of the canning factory Eric,--the queer, hating Eric who had waked
up that morning.

But how he did hate! His eyes were full of hating tears, and they were
running down his face, making horrid white streaks on his dirty cheeks.
He was hating so hard that he did not even care if people saw his tears.
He lifted his face straight up and dropped his arms straight down at his
side and walked right along, no matter how fast the tears came.

Now he had often hated before, but never quite like this. Before, it had
been a frightened hate, a gnawing, hurting thing deep down in his heart.
But to-day it was a flaring hate, a burning thing right up in his head.
It was big, too, because it included everything that he knew, Mrs. Freg,
her boys, the street, the people jostling him, and hottest and wildest
of all the canning factory. How terrible to go in there in the morning,
when the sun was only just up, and not to come out again until it was
quite down! Eric knew little about play, but he did know that if he
could only be let stay out in the sunshine he would find things to do
there. If they'd only let him try it once!

So he walked along in the direction the others were going, the hating
tears in his eyes and on his face. But no one laughed at him, and no one
asked him what was the matter, even the other children. For he was not
crying in the usual way with little boys. He was walking along with his
head up. So people did not bother him.

He had reached the outskirts of the town, and was almost in the shadow
of the big, cruel factory, when the Magic began to work. For there was
magic in this day that had started so badly. It was only waiting for
Eric to see it before it would take hold of him and carry him away into
happiness. It had waited for him at the door of the dull, bare little
house that had never been home to him, but his tears would not let him
see it. So it had followed along beside him all the way to the factory,
waiting for him to feel, even if he could not see. And he did
feel,--just in time to let the Magic work.

He felt that the day that had begun so freezingly was warm, strangely
warm. He wiped the tears from his eyes away to the side of his face with
his sleeve, and looked about. The sun was very bright, but in a mild,
pleasant way. And a tree on the other side of the street was showering
softly, softly, softly, yellow autumn leaves, until they covered the
cobblestones all around. Eric did not think about being late. The Magic
was pulling him now. He went across and stood under the tree, and felt
the leaves showering on his head and shoulders, and caught a few in his
hands.

All the people passed, and soon the last one was hidden behind the heavy
factory door. Eric gave the door a glance or two, but did not go. Over
the roof of the factory he saw the tops of tall trees waving. He had
never looked so high above the factory before. But he knew there was a
wood on the other side, a wood he had always been too tired to think of
exploring, even on holidays. Now he saw the tops of the tall trees
beckoning him in a golden mist. "The mist is the yellow leaves they're
dropping," thought Eric. With every beckon the golden mist of leaves
grew brighter and brighter, until he could not see the beckoning any
more, but only the mist. Still he knew the beckoning was going on behind
the mist.

"If I'm to live in the streets at night," he thought to himself,
"there's no need to live in the factory by day. I'll just go and see
what those trees want of me."

Very slowly, with little firm steps, he went by the factory door, and
then around under its windows to the wood at the back.

It was Indian Summer. That was why the golden leaves were showering in a
mist, and why the sun was so warm.

Eric dropped his ragged coat and cap on the edge of the wood,--it was so
warm,--and went in.

A little girl had been watching him from her place at one of the factory
windows where she was sorting cans. She had seen him before, working at
the factory, day after day, and they had played together sometimes in
the noon half hour. Now she wondered what he was doing out there. Had
they sent him, perhaps, to do a different kind of work that could only
be done in the woods? But as he walked away in under the trees farther
and farther, the golden mist that was over the wood drew in about him;
and although she leaned far forward over the cans at a great risk of
knocking over dozens and setting them rolling,--he was lost in it. It
had dropped down behind him like a curtain.




CHAPTER II

THE BRIGHT HOUSE


Eric knew nothing of the little girl and her thoughts. He was walking in
a golden mist, but he could see quite perfectly, and even far ahead down
long tree aisles. At first the trees did not grow very close together,
and there was little underbrush. Several narrow paths started off in
different directions,--straight little paths made by people who knew
where they were going. But Eric did not know where he was going, so he
struck off in a place where there was no sign of a path. Soon the trees
drew closer and closer together, until their branches locked fingers
overhead and shook the yellow leaves down for each other. The leaves
showered softly and steadily. Eric's feet rustled loudly in them.

Soon he stopped and took off his worn shoes and stockings. He left them
where he took them off and went on, barefoot. Now that he was only in
his shirt and trousers he began to run and leap. He leapt for the
drifting leaves, and he ran farther and farther into the happy
stillness.

The trees crowded and crowded, and the mist of leaves grew brighter and
brighter. No birds sang, for they had all flown away for the winter, and
there were no flowers. But the drifting leaves hid the bareness, and
magic covered everything.

After Eric had run and leapt and waded in the crackling pools of leaves
for a long time, he grew hungry. "But there is no food here," he
thought; "and anyway it doesn't matter. It's much better to be hungry
here than in the dirty streets."

He decided to go to sleep and forget about it. So he lay down in the
leaves. They fell over him, a steady, gentle shower, and he slept long,
and without dreaming anything.

But when he woke he was cold. And worse than that, the golden mist had
faded. It was almost twilight. The light was cold and still and gray.
While he slept Indian Summer had vanished and its magic with it.

Now no matter how fast Eric ran, or how high he jumped, he was chilly
through and through. But he did not think of trying to find the way out
of the wood. The streets would be as cold as the forest, and never,
never, never, if he starved and froze, was he going back to that house
in the village where he had lived but never belonged. So he went on
until the gray light faded, and the soft rustle of falling leaves
changed to the noise of wind scraping in bare branches. When he was very
cold, and ready to lie down and sleep again to forget, he came quite
suddenly on an opening in the trees. In the dim light he saw a little
garden closed in with a hedge of baby evergreens. The wind was rustling
through the stalks of dead flowers in the garden. But in the middle of
it was a little low house, and the windows and doors were glowing like
new, warm flowers.

Yes, it was a house and a garden away there in the wood, but no path led
to it through the forest, and there was a strangeness about it as about
no house or garden Eric had ever seen.

Although no path led through the wood to the house, a path did run
through the garden to the low door stone. Eric went up it and stood
looking in at the door, which was open.

The glow of the house came from a leaping, jolly fire in a big stone
fire-place, and from half a dozen squat candles set in brackets around
the walls. It was the one lovely room that Eric had ever seen. It was so
large that he knew it must occupy the whole of the little house. But in
spite of all the brightness, the comers were dim and far.

There were two strange people there, or they were strange to Eric
because they were so different from any people he had ever known. One
was a young woman who sat sewing cross-legged on a settle at the side of
the fire-place. About her the strangest thing was her hair. It was not
like most women's,--long and twisted up on her head. It was short, and
curled back above her ears and across her forehead like flower-petals.
It was the color of the candle-flames. But her face was brown, and her
neck and long hands were brown, as though she had lived a long time in
the sun. Her eyes that were lifted and scarcely watching the work in her
hands, were very quiet and gray.

She was watching and talking to a little girl who was skipping back and
forth between a rough tea-table set near the fire and an open
cupboard-door in the wall. She was carrying dishes to the table, and now
and then stopping to stir something good-smelling which hung over the
fire in a pewter pot, with a strong bent twig for a handle.

The child was strange in a very different way from her mother. The
mother, one could see, was merry in spite of her quiet eyes. But the
child was pale. Her face was pale and little and round. Her hair was
pale, too, the color of ashes, and braided in two smooth little braids
hanging half way down her back. She moved with almost as much swiftness
as the fire-shadows, and as softly too.

Both mother and daughter were dressed in rough brown smocks, with narrow
green belts falling loosely,--strange garments to Eric. And their feet
were bare.

But stranger than the house, stranger than the people in it, was the
fact that the mother was talking to the little girl just as people of
the same age talk to each other; and though Eric was shaking with cold
and aching with hunger, he could still wonder deeply at that.

"It's a long way 'round by the big pine," she was saying; "but you see I
am home in time for supper. Suppose I had not come until after dark.
What would you have done, Ivra?"

The little girl stopped in her busy-ness to stand on one foot and think
a second. "Why, I'd have put the supper over the fire, lighted the
candles, and run out to meet you."

"Oh, but you wouldn't know which way to run. I might come from any
direction."

"I'd follow the wind," cried Ivra, lifting her serious face and rising
to her tiptoes, one arm outstretched, as though she were going to follow
the wind right then and there.

It was at that minute they noticed the door had blown open, and that a
little boy was standing in it, looking at them.

But they neither stared nor exclaimed. Ivra ran to him, her arms still
outstretched in the flying gesture, and drew him in. His dirty face was
streaked with tears, and his legs and feet were blue with the cold. They
knew it was not question-time, but comfort-time, so the mother folded an
arm about him, and Ivra skipped more rapidly than ever between the
cupboard and the table. Almost at once supper was ready, and the table
set for three. As the last thing, Ivra brought all the candles and set
them in the middle of the table. They sat down,--Eric with his back to
the fire. It warmed him through and through, but their friendly faces
warmed him more.

Very little was said, but when the meal was nearly over Ivra asked him
how long he was going to stay with them. Immediately he stopped eating
and dropped his spoon. His eyes filled with tears. He had utterly
forgotten about his plight until then,--how he was homeless, workless
and bound to starve and freeze sooner or later. Ivra's mother saw the
misery in his face and quietly spoke, "We hope for a long time. As long
as you want to, anyway. Three in a wood will be merrier than two in a
wood. . . . If you like me I will be your mother."

Ivra clapped her hands. "Stay always," she cried. "I will be your
playmate. There will be many playmates besides, too, and I will help you
find them."

Eric glowed. The hatred that had been flaring in his head suddenly
faded, and the heavy thing that had been his heart for as long as he
could remember, became light as thistledown. He looked at the mother and
the kindness in her eyes made him tremble. "I will stay and be your
child," he said.




CHAPTER III

FIRELIGHT


When supper was done the three put away the supper things, carried the
table back to its place in the corner, and set the candles in their
brackets about the walls. Then almost at once the mother said it was
bath-time and bed-time.

Bath-time! Baths had been rare in Eric's life, and when they did happen
were unhappy adventures,--cold water in a hand basin in the kitchen
sink, a scratchy sponge, and a towel too small. So if Mrs. Freg had said
"bath-time and bed-time" to him now, he might have run away. But if
Ivra's mother said it, it must be. She was _his_ mother too, now, and he
loved her and thought her beautifully strange.

A surprise was waiting for him. The bath was a deep basin set in the
wall. There was a fountain in it that one had only to turn on to have
the basin fill with clear water. Eric slipped out of his ragged shirt
and trousers and climbed up into it. The fountain came splashing down on
his dusty, shaggy head, falling in rivulets down his back and breast. He
was like a bird taking a bath; there was such happy splashing and
dipping.

But no bird had ever the gentle soft drying, or was wrapped in such a
warm night gown as the mother found for Eric. It was one of Ivra's night
gowns, but quite large enough. Then she tucked him into a narrow couch
far from the fire. It was the first time Eric could ever remember having
slept alone.

Ivra was already in a bed against the opposite wall. Before the mother
got into hers, which was open and ready for her, she blew out all the
candles and opened the door and windows.

"Good night, my lambs," she said, and a very few minutes afterwards Eric
could see by the firelight that his mother and playmate were asleep.

How cold the wind felt as it blew over his face! But how warm and snug
his body was, there in the soft, clean night gown between the light,
warm blankets! How fine to be there so warm in bed while his cheeks grew
red in the cold air and burned deliciously. How could he ever sleep? He
was too happy!

He looked at the fire. And then he looked harder. It was not a fire at
all, but a young girl, all bright and golden, sitting with her head
drowsily bent forward on her knees and her arms wrapped close about her
legs. But as he watched she slowly lifted her bright head, and looked
quietly about the room. Then she gradually and beautilully rose and
stepped out of the fireplace onto the floor. Slowly she moved across to
the mother's couch and stood still as though looking down at her. Slowly
she bent and drew the bed-clothes higher about her shoulders, and kissed
the flower-petal hair curled back on the pillow.

She moved then to Ivra's couch, still slowly and very beautifully, and
Eric could see her smile at the little one huddled there, half on her
face, one arm thrown up over her head. Gently the fire-girl rolled her
into a relaxed position on her side, tucked in the flung arm, and kissed
the closed eyelids.

Then she stood a minute, looking away, Eric did not know where. But his
heart began to ache with wonder and longing. Would she come to him
too--or was he only a stranger?

He lay still, watching her from his dark corner. At last she stopped
looking away, and came across the floor to him. She brought all the
brightness of the room with her, and her feet made no sound on the
boards. When she stood above him he shut his eyes, though he wanted very
much to look up into her face. She bent down and her hands smoothed his
covers, warmed his pillow and lay still for a minute like sunlight on
his cheek.

When he opened his eyes again, she had gone back to the fireplace, all
her brightness with her, and was resting there, a drowsy, golden girl,
her head bent forward on her knees and her slim arms wrapped close about
her legs.

Eric lay and watched her for many sleepy minutes while her light fell
dimmer and dimmer, lower and lower. When it was just a tiny flicker he
dropped to sleep.




CHAPTER IV

THE GOSSIP


He slept long and deeply, for when he woke he felt rested. But he did not
open his eyes. "It must be time for Mrs. Freg to shake me," he was
thinking. "Until she does I'll just stay as I am and pretend it wasn't a
dream, but real." For although he remembered very well all that had
happened to him yesterday, he could not believe it was true.

So he lay still in his snug bed, wondering that Mrs. Freg's boys had
left him so much of the bed-clothes. "How fine to have a little time to
pretend a dream!" he said to himself. But Mrs. Freg did not come and did
not come, until at last he opened his eyes, just in wonderment. "It must
be six o'clock!"

When he saw where he was, and that the dream was true, his heart almost
stood still for joy. He was indeed far away in the woods, safe and snug
and warm in this bright house, and Mrs. Freg could never reach him here.
And he would not go to the canning factory that day, nor the next, nor
the next, nor ever again. The new mother had said so. His happiness
brought him up in bed wide awake, and then he got out. He had not
learned to bound out yet, but that came.

The fire was burning merrily. All was in order, the beds made and pushed
back against the wall, the hearth swept, and some clusters of bright red
berries arranged above the fireplace. But where were Ivra and
Helma?--Ivra had called her mother "Helma" last night, and so it was
that Eric already called her and thought of her. There was not the
tiniest sign of them.

Oh, but yes. There on the floor near the hearth lay a little brown
sandal, one of its strings pulled out and making a curlycue on the
floor. That must belong to Ivra. The fire, the red berries, and the
little, worn sandal, seemed to be wishing Eric a good morning and a
happy day. There was plenty of mush in the pot swinging over the fire,
and on the table drawn up to it, a wooden spoon, a bowl, and a jug of
rich cream. So they had not forgotten him. They had only let him sleep
as long as he would. They must have stolen about like mice, getting
breakfast, clearing up, and tidying the room; and then closed the door
very softly behind them when they went out.

And wonder of wonders! After yesterday's Indian Summer, outside it was a
wild winter day. Gusts of snow were hurling against all the windows of
the house, and blowing a fine spray under the door. Eric with his face
against a windowpane could see only as far as the evergreen hedge
because the trees beyond were wreathed in whirling snowclouds. The dead
flowers in the garden were hidden under the blowing snow. The little
straight walk up to the door was lost in it, and the footprints Ivra and
Helma must have made when they went away were hidden too.

Something red blew against the hedge. For a minute Eric thought it was a
big bird. But it found the opening and came through, and then he saw it
was a little old woman. She came briskly up to the house, a red cape
blowing about her, sometimes right up over her head, for because of the
jug she was carrying she could not hold it down. She walked in without
stopping to knock and was as surprised to see Eric there as he was to
see her. But she got over it at once.

"Good morning," she said cheerfully, going across the room, whisking a
pitcher out of the cupboard and emptying her jug of milk into it. "This
is the milk for them, and it's as much as ever that I got here with it.
The wind is in a fine mood-pushed me here and there all the way through
the wood, and tried to steal my cape from me, say nothing of Helma's
milk! Perhaps some of the Wind Creatures wanted them, or it might be old
Tree Man himself, looking for a winter cape for his daughter. But I
said, 'No, no. The milk is for Helma and little Ivra! I take it to them
every morning and I'll take it this morning whether or no, so pull all
you like--cape or milk you'll not get. The cape has a good clasp, and
I've a good hold of the jug. Pull away!"

Here the old woman--the pitcher put away, and the cupboard door
closed--dropped down on the settle and waited for Eric to speak. She was
a jolly little old woman, one could see at a glance. Her face was the
color of a good red apple, and just as round and shiny. Her eyes were
beady black, bright and quick, and surrounded by a hundred finest
wrinkles, that all the smiles of her life had made. Her mouth was pursed
up like a button, out of which her words came shooting, quick and bright
and merry.

Eric stood looking at her, not thinking to say anything. So after the
briefest pause she went on, peeping into the pot.

"I see you have some mush here, so as I've come all the way from the
farm and am ready for a second breakfast after my tussle with the wind,
I'll share it with you. Or perhaps you have had yours already."

"No, no," cried Eric, suddenly remembering how hungry he was and hoping
she would not take it all. "I have just waked up."

"So. Then we'll breakfast together," and away she flew to the cupboard
again and brought out a second bowl and spoon. Then she stirred the mush
round and round a few times and dished it up. Eric noticed that she
divided it exactly evenly. She flooded both bowls with cream, and
together they sat down to it. What a good breakfast that was, and how
fast the little old woman talked!

But in spite of all her talking and flying around she had looked Eric up
and down and through and through, and made up her mind what kind of a
person he was. What she saw was a pale little boy of nine in a ragged
shirt and trousers, and barefooted. His hair was shaggy and unbrushed
but tossed back from a wide brow. His mouth was sullen. But she forgot
all about shabby clothes, unbrushed hair, and sullen mouth when she came
to his eyes. They were wide and clear, and returned the old woman's keen
glance with a gaze of steady interest. Sullen and pale, but
clear-eyed--she liked the little stranger. And so she went on talking.

"I bring them milk every day. It's a long way here from my farm, but not
too far when it's for them. Helma's gone into the village, hasn't she?
When I came to Little Pine Hill this morning the snow stopped whirling
for a minute, and I caught a glimpse of her a-striding across the
fields. It's a fine way of walking she has--like the bravest of Forest
People! When I reached the Tree Man's the wind didn't stop for me, but I
spied that child, Ivra, just where I knew she'd be,--racing and chasing
and dancing with the Snow Witches out at the edge of the wood. 'It's a
pity she can't go with her mother,' I said to myself when I saw her,
'and not be wasting her time like that. The Snow Witches are no good to
any one. But--'"

Eric interrupted there, having finished his mush and pricking up his
cars at the mention of witches.

"Are they really witches?" he cried. "And have you seen them yourself?"

"What else would they be?" asked the old woman. "They're the creatures
that come out in windy, snowy weather, to dance in the open fields and
run along country roads. Ordinary people are afraid of them and stay
indoors when they're about. Their streaming white hair has a way of
lashing your face as they rush by, and then they never look where
they're going. They care nothing about running into you and knocking the
breath out of you. Then, they're so cruel to children!"

"But Ivra isn't afraid of them!" wondered Eric.

"Not she," said the old woman. "She runs _with_ them instead of away
from them. When I saw them back there they had all taken hands and were
leaping in a circle around her. She was jumping and dancing in the
center as wild and lawless as they, and just as high, too. . . . But it's a
pity she isn't with her mother all the same, going on decent errands in
the village. Only of course it's not her fault, poor child! She daren't
go into the village."

"Why _daren't_ she?" asked Eric.

"_How_ dare she?" cried the old woman. "She'd be seen, for she's only
part fairy, of course. But hush, hush!"

She clapped her hands over her mouth. "What am I telling you,--one of
the secrets of the forest, and you a stranger here? You must forget it
all. Ivra's a good child. Now don't ask me any more questions, or I
might tell you more."

But Eric had begun to wonder. What did it mean, that Ivra was part
fairy? And why wasn't it safe for her to be seen in the village? And
were there really witches, and was she playing with them out there in
the wild day?

The old woman was talking on, but he heard no more.

Then the door blew open in a snowy gust of wind, and there stood Helma,
the mother, her arms full of bundles, her cheeks ruddy from the wind,
and her short hair crisp and blown.




CHAPTER V

WORLD STORIES


Now Eric learned that the old woman's name was Nora, for that was what
Helma called her, and seemed glad to find her there. She stayed on only
long enough to see what Helma had brought in her bundles, and then
started out for the farm, drawing her red cape closely about her this
time, and not blowing much as she walked briskly to the gap in the
hedge. Once through she disappeared quickly in the high drifting snow.
Hardly had she gone her way when Ivra came from another, jumping the
hedge and reaching the door in three bounds.

Helma had bought a good deal of thick brown cloth in the village and a
strip of brown leather. It was all for Eric. She had noticed his lack of
shoes and stockings last night, and that his worn clothes were much too
poor and thin for winter in the forest. To-day, while she sewed for him,
he would have to stay in. That was a pity, for it is such fun out in a
storm. By night, though, all would be finished.

"And that is good!" exclaimed Ivra. "For to-night the Tree Man has asked
us to a party. We're going to roast chestnuts and play games, and
there's to be a surprise, too. The Tree Girl called it all out to me as
I passed just now. She put only her head through the door, for the snow
came so suddenly it caught her without a single white frock,--only a
bonnet. But that was pretty. It has five points like a star, mother."

"The Tree Girl," said Eric. "What a queer name! But how did she know
about me to ask me too? Did she ask me?"

"I told her about you. And of course she asked you. You are my
playmate!"

Helma pulled a table to the settle and sat down with all the brown cloth
before her, a work-basket, and shears. But first she measured Eric for
his new clothes.

"You may make the leggins, if you want to," she said to Ivra, "and when
you come to a hard place tell me and I will help. You may even measure
them yourself.... We're the only Forest People, Eric, who wear anything
but white in the winter. Most Forest People like to be the color of
their world. They often laugh at us. But I like brown. Ivra makes me
think of a brown, blown leaf, and now here will be two of them! You can
blow together all over the forest."

Eric's eyes swam in sudden, happy tears, but he only said, "_Nora_ wore
red."

"Oh, she's not one of us," laughed Helma. "But she's lived close to us
so long, she is able to see us. We aren't afraid of her. She's a good
neighbor."

But why might they be afraid of such a nice old woman, Eric wondered. He
was to learn sometime, and much beside, for this was the beginning of
new things for him, and his mother, Helma, and Ivra were strange people.
But how he loved them!

"Now that we are settled at our work, and nothing to interrupt, what
shall it be?" asked Helma. She and Ivra were sewing briskly, one in each
corner of the settle. Eric was stretched on the floor, looking now into
the blaze, and now up at the windows where the snow tapped and swirled;
for to-day,--Helma had said,--was to be a rest day for him. It was the
first rest day he could remember, and how _good_ it was! To know he
could lie there with no cans to sort or label for hours, and no Mrs.
Freg to boss him about when work was over! There were to be no more cans
for him forever, and no more Mrs. Freg. Helma had said that quite
firmly. He believed her and was so happy that he trembled. And so, it
being true that never again should he go back to that unchildlike life
that had frightened him so, and tired him so, all the breaths he drew
felt like sighs of relief, and he turned his shaggy little head on his
arm, crooked under it, and watched Helma's flying brown fingers with
glad eyes.

"What shall it be?" asked Helma.

"Oh, World Stories, please," said Ivra, drawing her feet up under her as
she bent over her sewing.

"Eric probably knows very few of the World Stories," said Helma. "So
sometime I shall have to go back to the beginning and tell them all over
for him."

"And I'll stay and hear them over again too!" cried Ivra, dropping her
work to clasp her hands. "I love to hear stories over."

"Why, better than that, you might tell them yourself. Would you like
that?"

"Oh, yes--if I can. Do you suppose I can, mother Helma? I shall begin at
the very beginning, way back before men were in the world at all, or
fairies even. He'd like to hear about the big animals. And you will
listen, mother, to see that I get it all right?"

Now these World Stories of Helma's were wonderful stories, but all true.
They began way back when the Earth was young. There were stories about
the Earth itself, how it hung in space and turned, making day and night.
When the strange, great animals that by-and-by appeared on the Earth and
have since gone from it first came into the stories, and then, later,
the floods and glaciers, and at last the first man,--any child might
have listened with delight and wonder. Ivra had listened so ever since
she was a tiny girl, old enough to understand at all. And with man, and
the wonderful happenings that came along with him, Ivra had begged for
the stories day and night, and never could have enough of them. For then
in a great procession came the stories of cities and nations, of great
men and women, of explorations and adventures. They led in turn to
stories of languages and writing, of painting and geometry, of music and
of life. The names of these things may not promise good stories to you,
but that is only because you do not know them as stories. If you could
listen to Helma telling them, by the fire, or out in the starlight, deep
in the wood, or swinging in a tree-top,--then no other stories you might
ever hear would satisfy you quite. So perhaps it is as well you do not
know now just where Helma's little house is standing deep in the wood
under the snow.

Ivra always said that the nicest thing about the stories was the
interruptions. Helma never minded them, and she answered all the
questions Ivra asked. She answered them by making things that Ivra could
see with her own eyes, by drawing pictures on the ground or in the
ashes, building with earth or snow, playing with wind and water, and in
a hundred other ways. Sometimes the answer to a question would take up
the playtime of a whole day.

But now Eric was to hear his first story, World Story or any other kind.
Can you imagine how it would feel if to-day you were to hear the first
story of your life?

"All ready?" asked Helma.

The silence in the room said plainer than words that all was ready for
the World Story. This time it was a story about a man named Saint
Francis, and a story after Eric's own heart.

Almost as fast as the story went the work of Helma's fingers. But Ivra
was neither so swift nor so skilled, and the leggins were dropped many
times from forgetful hands because all her thoughts were gone away
following the story.

Yet somehow the leggins got done, and the jacket and trousers got done,
and even a little round cap, and all before dusk. For a finishing touch
Helma sewed two soft little brown feathers she had picked up in the snow
one on either side of the cap,--which gave Eric, small as they were and
soft as they were, a look of flying.

Then nothing remained but the sandals, and because Eric was well rested
by then, he was allowed to help at them. They were cut from the strip of
brown leather, and Helma showed Eric how to shape them and sew them
himself. So after supper he stood attired, all in brown, a pale, happy
child, ready for his first party.

Ivra and Eric were to go to the Tree Man's party alone, for Helma was
going far away from the wood to spend the evening with a comrade. It was
to be a very long walk for her, for she put on her heaviest sandals and
pulled the hood of her cloak up over her hair.

She walked with the children as far as Little Pine Hill. It was a low
hill, bare of trees, except for a dwarfed pine on the top. In summer the
slope was slippery with the needles of the little pine, but now it was
several inches deep in snow. It was bright starlight, and far away down
an avenue of trees, Eric saw shining open fields, and beyond them the
lights of the town.

There Helma said good-by. Eric looking up at her in the starlight saw
her hair like pale firelight under her dark hood and her eyes so calm
and friendly. He clung to her hand for a minute.

"Have a good time," she told them. Ivra leapt away and Eric after her.
Helma stood watching until their little forms had flickered out of sight
among tree-shadows. Then she sped down the starlit avenue towards the
open fields and the town.




CHAPTER VI

AT THE HEART OF A TREE


Ivra and Eric ran until the stars were almost lost to them under the snow
roof of the forest. Once Eric stopped to tie his sandal-string which had
loosened and was bothering him. Then the stillness of the world startled
him.

He cried to Ivra to wait, and she came back to his side. "Don't be
frightened," she comforted. "There are Forest People near us. They would
walk with us, for some of them are going to the party too, but they are
afraid of you. That's why they've drawn their white hoods over their
heads and keep away. Once we are inside the Tree Man's, though, it will
be all right. They'll come in too, and not be afraid any more."

"But why are they afraid of me?" asked Eric, tugging at his
sandal-string. "No one else has ever been afraid of me. Even Juno, Mrs.
Freg's cat, who was afraid of 'most every one, liked me and jumped into
my lap. Why are the Forest People afraid?"

"Well, they are Forest People, you see, and you are an Earth Child.
Mother and I weren't afraid of you, of course, because,--we aren't
exactly Forest People."

Ivra paused and the silence came back. Eric looked up at her.

"Are you cold?" he asked.

"No, no." But she began to jump up and down and knock her heels together
to get warm. Eric still struggled with his lacings. Ivra stopped jumping
and went down on her knees in the snow to straighten them out for him.
Eric's fingers were awkward with knots, and besides, now, they were numb
with the cold. But Ivra had everything right in a minute. She crossed
the strings over his instep and tied them snugly above his ankle almost
before he could think. Then they ran on. In starlit spaces Eric caught
glimpses of hurrying figures, so swift and light he could not tell
whether they walked or flew. Their cloaks sparkled white in starlight
until he was not sure but they might be starbeams, and not Forest People
at all.

One suddenly started up just at his elbow, and was away like the wind.
Ivra began to run and to call after it. "Wild Star! Silly Wild Star!
It's only I, Ivra, and my playmate. Wait for us!"

Eric followed her, running as fast as he could, but the snow held him
back, and all the trees in the forest seemed to gather to stand in his
way. Ivra came back to him, laughing. "They are so afraid of you! No one
will come near us until the Tree Man is there to protect him."

Soon they came to a big beech-tree standing in an open space with
smaller beeches making a circle around it. The starlight showed,
strangely, a narrow door in the trunk. Ivra pushed it open and Eric
followed in after her, wondering at going into a tree.

They were on a flight of stairs lighted by starlight from a window
somewhere high up. At the head of the flight they came to a door, and
through the crack beneath it streamed a warmer light than starlight.
Ivra opened that door gayly, and through it with her, Eric went to his
first party.

It was the jolliest room in all the world. The firelight and candlelight
did not reach so far as the walls, but left them in soft darkness. So
Eric had the feeling that the room was really much too large to be
inside of a tree. But in spite of its bigness, it was very cozy. The
fireplace was in the middle of the floor, just a great hollowed boulder,
heaped with crackling twigs.

The candles, red, green, yellow, brown and orange, stood circlewise on a
table by which the Tree Man sat, carving a doll out of a stick. A
workbasket on the table was overflowing with bright threads and pieces
of queer cloth.

Eric saw these things because just for a minute he was too shy to look
at the people in the room. Almost at once he had to look at the Tree
Man, however, for he came and shook him by the shoulders. Eric had been
shaken by the shoulders before, so he shrank away. But this was very
different from Mrs. Freg's shakings. The Tree Man was chuckling, not
scolding, and the dark eyes that Eric looked up above the long white
beard to find were friendly and wise.

"Do not fear us, little Earth Child," he said. "It is we that have cause
to fear you. You have only to blink your eyes, pretend to be knowing,
and we are nothing. But your eyes are so wide and so clear, we trust
you. Ivra told us there was not the tiniest shadow in them, not even the
shadow of leaf. Only hunger. But we're not afraid of hunger. Come, have
a good time at the party."

Then the Tree Girl, the Tree Man's daughter, came to him. She was shy,
and shook all her soft brown hair about her cheeks. A circle of little
yellow leaves kept her hair from her eyes, which, in spite of her
bashfulness, were steady and kind like her father's. "I am glad you are
here." she said. From that minute Eric felt at home in the tree.

Eric and Ivra were the first of the guests. The others perhaps had been
too scared to come. But soon knock after knock sounded at the door, and
in flocked the Forest People who had been invited.

First came the Bird Fairies, five of them together, merry and good
little creatures as ever lived in the wood. They had arrived only that
day from their summer homes in the far north, 'way up among the
snow-barrens. They always spent the winter in this wood, living in the
empty birds' nests and spending their time making up songs to teach the
birds that would come back in the spring. Bird Fairies cannot sing a
note themselves, nor carry an air, but they make up fine songs for the
spring birds, who while they can sing with beautiful voices really have
but few ideas.

They are fluffy, cuddly, swift little creatures, tiny and quiet. One
might think them of little account just at first, but not for long. For
they are the farthest-traveled of all the Forest People, except the Wind
Creatures only. Now they were fluttering in, and off came their white
cloaks and forth they hopped in bright colors, little feet twinkling and
pattering, little wings lifting and wavering. They gathered around the
Tree Man, nestling in a row on his shoulder, running up and down his
arms, giving all of the news of their long journey into his ear. He
chuckled and chuckled and soon sat down by the table again, nodding his
head with delight at the tales they were telling him.

Meanwhile, another group entered,--the Forest Children. The Forest
Children are little girls and boys who live all by themselves in moss
houses deep in the thickest of the forest, and know nothing of mothers,
nurses or schools. They came tumbling, cheering, and skipping in, curls
bobbing, eyes shining. When their white cloaks were taken off with the
help of the Tree Girl and Ivra, it was plain to see that they had no
mothers. Their frocks were torn and stained, and half their
sandal-strings untied and flapping. The Tree Girl sighed as she patted
the bobbing curls into some order, tied the laces and straightened a
buckle here and there.

Now the room was musical with sound.

The last guest arrived, Wild Star, who had run away from Eric in the
forest. He was a Wind Creature. Wind Creatures are growing-up girls and
boys who live near the edge of the forest. Like all fairies, they can
only be seen by Earth People on a day that is clearer than a day should
be, or by people like Eric who have no shadows in their eyes.

Wild Star dropped his bright white cloak as he entered. His wings were
purple, the color of early morning, high and pointed. But they clapped
themselves neatly down his back to avoid the ceiling. He was a beautiful
boy, wild and starry, and that is how he got his name. Wind Creatures
are strong and swift, a little too wide-awake and far-traveled to be
very intimate with the Forest People. But Wild Star, though he was as
swift and strong as any, often came to the Tree Man's, and often played
with the Forest Children in their moss village for days together. He
loved the Tree Man, and now he sat down cross legged by him, and laid
his bright cheeck against his knee.

So the party began.




CHAPTER VII

TREE MOTHER AND THE DROWSY BOAT


"Let's play hide-and-go-seek," cried the Forest Children, for that is
always their favorite game.

Up jumped Wild Star, down fluttered the Bird Fairies, in crowded the
Forest Children, and the Tree Man counted out for them. He pointed his
finger at each in turn while he said this verse, which he made up on the
spot:

  "Sticks are racing in the flood--
    Trees are racing in the wood--
  In the tree-tops winds are racing--
    In the sky-tops clouds are chasing.
  In the tree-heart snug and warm,
    We hear nothing of the storm.

  When we play at hide-and-seek,
    It is _you_ must count the sheep."

At "you" the finger pointed at Eric, and it meant that he was to be
"It."

"Put your head here on my knee. Shut your eyes and count one hundred
sheep jumping over a stone wall, not too fast," explained the Tree Man.
"While you're counting the others hide. Anywhere in this room, and
anywhere on the stairs. Out-doors is no fair."

"But _where_ are the sheep?" asked Eric, "and how can I count them with
my eyes shut?"

Every one suddenly looked puzzled. The Forest Children's eyes grew wide
with wondering. The Bird Fairies fluttered uneasily. The Tree Girl
seemed dazed. Wild Star said, "Why, we never thought of that,--where
_are_ they?"

But Ivra laughed and ran to Eric. She took his hand and said, "The sheep
are inside your own head. Just shut your eyes and try to see them. It is
very easy. The wall is low, and there's a place where the stones are
beginning to roll down. The sheep go over there, one by one."

Eric shut his eyes and put his head down on the Tree Man's knee. And it
began to happen just as Ivra had said. There was a green hill-pasture, a
little gray stone wall slanting across it, and sheep, one by one,
jumping where the wall was broken down, following their leader. He
counted one hundred of them and then stopped although a dear little lamb
was trotting down the hill, trailing the procession. He wanted to see if
the lamb would be able to jump the wall too. But the Tree Man had said
one hundred, so he stopped and opened his eyes.

Things were strange. The Tree Man was nothing but an old stump. The room
felt very cold and it was bare. The fire in the boulder had gone out.
But he heard a soft fluttering somewhere and took heart. The Bird
Fairies! They might be hiding high, having wings. He went all around the
room, looking up into the dusk. At last, there they were in row on a
beam, their wings spread over their eyes.

"Bird Fairies, I spy!" cried Eric, and ran towards the stump. But wings
are swifter than feet, and the Bird Fairies reached the goal first.

He found Ivra at the top of the second flight of stairs, curled up in a
shadow.

"I spy!" and he ran just as fast as he could down the stairs. He was
ahead of her to the door, and thought he would surely win. But she
passed him in the room and touched the stump first.

The Tree Girl, of all places, was kneeling behind the stump. Of course
she touched it the minute Eric spied her, and so she was safe.

The Forest Children were hiding, some in the hall behind the door, some
on the stairs, one under the table. And everyone of them beat him to the
goal and touched it first.

"Now there's only Wild Star," Ivra cried. "You must catch him, Eric, or
else you'll have to be 'It' again!"

Wild Star was outside, up in the top of the tree in the starlight. Eric
discovered him by seeing one of the tips of his purple wings which was
caught in a crack of the sky door. "I spy!" he called, and pulled the
wing-tip to let Wild Star know he was found.

But of course Wild Star passed him like a flash, his strong wings
beating down.

Tears of vexation welled in Eric's eyes. One thing he had gained though.
Because he had found them all, even though he could not run so fast as
they, the Tree Man had come back, and sat there in the place of the
stump, and all was warm and bright again. The Tree Man had only wanted
to prove for himself that Eric could see Wild Star, the Bird Fairies,
and the others without Ivra to point them out to him. But he felt
satisfied now that Eric's eyes were really clear, and that he would
never hurt any of them by looking through them or pretending that they
did not exist.

"Wild Star is It now," he said. "For he didn't play fair, going outside
like that."

"Oh, I forgot outside was no fair," cried Wild Star, laughing.

So this time Eric hid with the others, while Wild Star counted sheep.

He ran wildly all round the room trying to find a hiding-place. But
everywhere there was someone ahead of him. At last he came back to the
Tree Man himself with Wild Star counting sheep at his knee.

"Ninety-five, ninety-six, ninety-seven," counted Wild Star. "Oh dear! Oh
dear!" Eric whispered to himself in despair.

Ivra was hiding behind the Tree Man, and so she jumped out and pulled
Eric back to hide with her.

"Ninety-eight, ninety-nine, one hundred!"

Wild Star started up, and never thinking to look behind the Tree Man
went circling the room in swift flight. He saw Ivra and Eric as he flew
over their heads, of course, and they laughed and touched the Tree Man
first.

But he caught most of the others, even the Forest Children who are so
swift and clever.

After that, almost everyone had to take his turn at being It.

When the merry game came to an end at last, they gathered around the
boulder fireplace. The twigs were glowing embers now and looked like
myriads of golden flower-buds. Then the Forest Children began clamoring
for a World Story. So Ivra climbed up on the Tree Man's knee and tipping
her head back against his chest, looked into the fire and told one of
Helma's World Stories. It was the story of a glacier. That may not sound
like a very interesting story to you, but if you could hear Ivra tell it
in all its wonder just as Helma had told it to her, you would never ask
for a better story. No, you would ask for that one over and over again,
as the Forest Children did the minute she was through.

But instead of telling that one over, Ivra told another, a little story
about some eggs and a brood of chickens. And they wanted _that_ over.
But there must be an end to everything, and so the Tree Girl brought out
a bowl of beechnuts, and they forgot the stories, and ate as much as
they wanted. There were apples, too, big and red and cold cheeked.
Everyone was hungry.

When all were satisfied, there was sudden whispering among the guests.
The Bird Fairies fluttered and hummed with excitement. The Forest
Children's eyes began to shine expectantly. Ivra, who still sat on the
Tree Man's knee, spoke what they were all thinking. "The surprise," she
said to the Tree Man. "You know you promised us a surprise to-night. Is
it time for it yet?"

"Yes," said the Tree Man. "It is. _High_ time! Come, put on your cloaks.
It's a cold night."

"But the surprise!" they all cried at once. "We don't want to go home
until we have had the surprise!"

"Oh, the surprise is up in the branches. My mother is there with her
air-boat, waiting to take you all home."

The Forest Children clapped their hands and jumped up and down until
their sandal-laces that were not already loose and flapping came undone
and flapped too. Wild Star sprang towards the stairs, his face alight,
Ivra slipped down from the Tree Man's knee and ran to Eric.

"The Tree Mother! The dear, beautiful Tree Mother! We are to see her and
ride with her!" she cried.

Then she dashed away for her cloak. The Forest Children, with the Tree
Girl's help, were tumbling into theirs, wrong-end-to mostly, ripping off
buckles in their hurry.

"The Tree Mother! The dear Tree Mother!" their little teeth chattered in
ecstasy.

When all were ready they crowded up the straight starlit stairs. At the
top they crawled out through the sky door, one by one, into the
branches. Eric followed Ivra, and saw a great black moth-like thing
poised in air by the tree's top. But it was hollowed like a boat and a
shadowy woman was standing upright in it. A dark cloak covered her, but
the hood had fallen back, and her face in the starlight was very
beautiful and very young, younger even than Helma's, whose face Eric had
thought all that day too young and glad to be a mother's. How could this
be the Tree Man's mother, he wondered,--the Tree Girl's grandmother!
Then he saw that her hair was white, whiter than all the snow that lay
in the forest.

It was very cold kneeling there and clinging in the tip of the great
beech-tree. The forest below was still and dark. But the air and the
wintry star-filled sky were bright with a blue, cold light. After the
warmth at the heart of the tree, the cold was almost unbearable. Eric
longed to wave his arms about, and jump up and down to get warm, but he
had to cling, still and motionless, to the branches to keep from
falling.

At last Ivra whispered "It's our turn now," and taking Eric's hand, she
made him jump with her right out into cold space. For one awful instant
he thought they were both falling down, down to the ground. But they had
only dropped into the air-boat. The Tree Mother leaned forward and
pulled a blanket over them. Her eyes as she did it, looked straight into
Eric's. They were dark, and deep as the forest shadows. He began to
speak to tell her who he was, for her look was questioning. But she put
her finger to her lips. Then he noticed for the first time that every
one was silent. Even the Tree Man and his daughter who stood in the tree
top waving good-by spoke no words, only nodded and waved. The last Bird
Fairy fluttered noiselessly in. Eric lay back under the warm blanket,
snuggled against Ivra. A Bird Fairy nestled into the palm of each of his
hands. All was still and warm. The air-boat slipped away high and higher
over the tree-tops and on and on.

On a cold, starlit night, nestled in feathery warmth, to sail over the
dark tree-tops, high and higher and on and on--that is a wonderful
thing. And when the Tree Mother stands above you, wrapped in her dark
cloak with her face shining under her cloudy white hair, now and then
bending to tuck the blanket more snugly about you--what could be more
blissful?

Very soon Eric became drowsy against his will. His eyelids dropped like
curtains shutting out the stars. But he roused when the boat stopped,
hovered, and sank down like a bird until it rested on the crusted snow
in the middle of a tiny village of tiny moss houses; only now, of
course, the houses were covered with snow, and looked like baby Eskimo
huts. The Forest Children crept sleepily out of the boat, kissing the
Tree Mother good-by as though in a dream. Not a word was spoken. There
was the creak of their little feet on the cold snow,--that was all. Each
child went alone into his little house. They were lighted and looked
warm through the doors, and Tree Mother nodded as though that were well.
But before the air-boat had risen out of sight, the lights were all out,
and the Forest Children sound asleep, snuggled into their moss beds.

From then on stops were frequent, and Eric woke at each one. At every
Bird Fairy nest at which they stopped, the Tree Mother leaned from the
boat and scooped the crusted snow out of the nest. Then when the Bird
Fairy was settled down, she powdered the snow with her fingers until it
was soft, and heaped it over the little creature, who was already
asleep.

Wild Star was left in the tip of the tallest tree in the forest. There
he lay without covering, his face up to the cold sky, his arms flung
back above his head, his wings folded tight. He half opened his
slumbrous eyes on the Tree Mother as the boat floated away, but before
the smile in them faded he was asleep.

There was straight, sure, even flying then to Helma's little house, set
in its snowy garden,--and down they sank to the door stone. The Tree
Mother carried Ivra, who was fast asleep, in in her arms. The fire leapt
when they entered, until the walls and floor danced with light. The Tree
Mother undressed Ivra, who never once opened her eyes, and tucked her
into bed. Then she helped Eric, who was fumbling and missing buttons in
a sleepy way. But he was awake enough to kiss her good-night. And that
was the end of everything until morning.




CHAPTER VIII

A WITCH AT THE WINDOW


When the children woke the next morning, there was no Helma. Her bed had
not been slept in. They had been too sleepy the night before to wonder
at her absence, but now they could hardly believe their eyes. The room
was strange and lonely without her. The fire had died in the night. They
sat up in their beds and talked about it.

"She always comes back before bedtime," said Ivra. "She has never stayed
away before."

Eric said, "Perhaps that is why the Tree Mother brought you in and
undressed you--perhaps she knew our mother had not come back. She looked
wise, as though she knew everything."

"She does know everything,--at least everything in the forest. But did
she bring me in, right here in her arms, Eric!"

"And undressed you while you were sound asleep."

Ivra laughed with delight, and clasped her hands. "Truly, truly? The
dear Tree Mother undressed me? Are you sure? Did she kiss me
good-night?--" But suddenly she grew solemn. "Yes, she knew that mother
was not here. She only takes care of those who have no one else. Well,
we will have to wait for mother, that is all. She will surely come this
morning."

But she did not come that morning, nor that day, nor for many days. You
shall hear it all.

The children laid the fire, together,--shivering but hopeful. Ivra got
the breakfast, teaching Eric, so that next time he could help. They
chattered and played a good deal, and really had quite a merry time over
it. It was only at first that Ivra was solemn over Helma's
disappearance. Soon her good sense told her that Helma loved them both,
and nothing could keep her long from her children.

After breakfast they washed and put away the dishes. Then they tidied
the room. They hurried over it a little, perhaps, for it was a bright
winter day, and all the forest was waiting to be played in. Before they
ran out, they put a log on the fire that it took both of them to lift.
If Helma should come back while they were away, she must find a warm
house. Ivra skipped back after they were outside to set out a bowl and
spoon for her, and stand the cream jug beside them.

Then away they fled, running and jumping in the frosty morning air. Ivra
taught Eric some games that could be played by two alone. They were
running games, climbing games, hiding games, jumping games. Ivra was
swift and strong and unafraid. Her cheeks reddened like apples in the
cold. She was a fine playfellow.

Not until they were hungry did they think of home. Then they ran, hand
in hand at last, jumping the garden hedge like deer, their hearts
beating with the expectation of running straight into Helma's arms. But
no Helma was there. Nora had come with the milk, left it, eaten the rest
of the porridge, and gone away again without waiting for a word with any
one. The children wished she had stayed. They needed some one to talk
with about their mother. Of course they knew she would come back, all in
her good time. Ivra made Eric understand that. But the room seemed even
emptier without her than it had in the morning. They cheered each other
as best they could, drank a lot of the fresh milk and ate some nuts.
They wanted to get away into the forest again and forget the empty
house, so they did not try to cook anything.

They played hard all the afternoon. Towards twilight it grew warmer and
began to snow, great wet flakes. They ran home, leaping the hedge again.
The house was still empty. Helma was not there.

They stirred up the fire, and sat down on the floor in front of it to
talk over what they should do. Then it happened,--the strange, the
beautiful, the frightful thing! Eric saw a face at the window. It was so
perfectly beautiful, that face, that he wanted to shut his eyes against
it. It almost hurt. It was the face of a young woman, very pale, but
when her eyes met Eric's they filled with dancing laughter. Her hair
under her peaked, white hood glistened blue-black like a river in the
snow. She lifted a small white hand and tapped on the window pane,
nodding to him merrily.

Ivra turned at the sound of the little fingers on the glass. When she
saw the face, she started to her feet with a frightened cry, and rushing
to the door, drew the bolt.

"She can't get in. She can't get in, Eric. Don't be afraid. We are
safe." But the poor little girl did not believe her own words. She was
trembling.

"Why, I'm not afraid," said Eric, running to the window. The merry eyes
drew him. Now her mouth danced into smiles with her eyes. She made
pretty signs to him to open the window and let her in.

But Ivra pulled him back. "Don't you know? It's the Beautiful Wicked
Witch!" she whispered.

But Eric was impatient. "How can she be wicked when she's so beautiful!"
he exclaimed. He was so little used to beautiful people in his life that
now he was fascinated and delighted.

The Beautiful Wicked Witch looked at Ivra then, and Ivra saw how her
eyes were dancing, great black eyes full of splendor and fun. She caught
her breath. She laughed back at the Beautiful Wicked Witch. She could
not help herself. But her hands flew to her mouth to stop the laugh.

"Shut your eyes, Eric. That must be best, not to look at her at all.
That is what mother did when she came before. She bolted the door and
then we sat down in front of the fire and never looked at the window
once, while she told me a long, lovely World Story about Psyche and her
little playmate Eros. Then when we had forgotten all about the Beautiful
Wicked Witch, we looked at the window by accident and she was gone.
Come, I'll tell you a World Story now, the same one."

But Eric hardly heard what she was saying. He moved nearer and nearer to
the window. Ivra followed him, charmed by the laughing face there too.
Then together they unbolted the windowpane and opened it outward. The
Beautiful Wicked Witch stepped in.

"How silly to be afraid of me, children," she laughed. "I have only come
to play with you."

"Oh goody!" cried both of the children together. For now that she was in
the room all their fear and wonder had vanished.

It was dusk, and so they lighted all the candles and poked the fire,
before they turned to entertain their guest. But the candles did not
burn very well, very faintly and flickeringly,--and the fire fell lower
and lower, instead of growing higher and higher as they nursed it.

"Don't mind about that," laughed the Beautiful Wicked Witch. "There's
enough light from the window for us to play together in. We won't bother
with the stubborn old fire and the silly little copy-cat candles. Come,
what shall we play?"

But the children had been playing hard all day, and their bodies were
tired. "Oh, tell us a story instead of playing," begged Ivra. "This is
the time when mother tells her very best stories."

"Well, I am not mother," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch; "but I will
tell you the best stories I can. Come sit near the window where the
light is stronger. That fire will never burn while I am here. I am
brighter than it, and the old thing is jealous."

The children laughed at her joke. But it was true,--she was very bright.
Her eyes seemed to light the room, or perhaps it was her gown, like an
opal fire, blue and pink and purple, changing and glowing, and made of
the softest silk.

Ivra nestled close to her knee where she could stroke the gleaming silk.
Eric sprawled on the floor at her feet, his face upturned to hers.

Then she told them a story. It was not like any of Helma's World
Stories, but the children liked it. It was all about a gorgeous bird she
had at home in her tree-house. She told how she had heard it singing one
morning in early spring, high up in the branches of her tree, and how
she had watched it day after day flying back and forth in the forest,
its yellow breast flashing among the green leaves. It had a long golden
bill, and its tail was black as jet; and its wings were the softest gray
in the world with a feather of jet in either one. Its song was the
clearest, the highest, the purest of all the bird songs in the forest.
It was a wonderful bird, and she wanted it for her own.

Then she told the children how she had set traps for it, and how it had
escaped every time. But at last she had made a dear little cage, all
woven of spring flowers and leaves, and put food in it. Still the bird
escaped, pulling the food out with its long bill and never getting
inside the door. And finally she told them how she did capture that
wild, shy bird by learning its song and singing it sitting in her
tree-house with the window open, until the bird heard and came flying in
wonder to find what other bird was calling it. Then she had closed the
window and the bird was hers. It hung now in the pretty cage in her
prettiest room, and sometimes sang in the middle of the night.

Eric liked the story, and all the better because it was a true story.
And the Beautiful Wicked Witch said he could see the bird himself if he
would come to her house. He could stroke its bright breast, and it would
sing perhaps. Then there were other things caged in her house, cunning
little animals, and some big ones, worth any boy's seeing.

But Ivra answered for Eric, shaking her head hard. "No, no. Mother
doesn't want us to visit you."

But Eric said, "May I open the cage door and the window and see the bird
flash away? I should like that."

"No. Well, perhaps," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch. "Will you come
then?"

"I can't, I suppose, if Mother Helma doesn't want me to. Are you sure
she doesn't, Ivra?"

Ivra was sure.

The Beautiful Wicked Witch laughed then. "Of course, if you _tell_ her
she won't let you come. But if you came without telling, how could she
mind?"

"That sounds true,--but someway it can't be," said Ivra. And that seemed
to end it.

But after a little the Beautiful Wicked Witch began another story. This
one was about a frock she had made, a wonderful thing all of cobwebs and
violet petals, with tiniest rosebuds around the neck. If Ivra were to
slip that frock over her head, and unbraid her funny little pigtails,
she would look as pretty as any fairy in the world.

Ivra was not too young to want to be pretty. If she would only go to the
Beautiful Wicked Witch's house, she could try on that dress, and wear it
for one whole day if she liked. Ivra clasped her hands. But then she
thought, and asked a question. "Could I play in it, and run and climb?
Would I be as free as in this little old brown smock?"

The Beautiful Wicked Witch raised her hands in horror. "My cobweb frock!
Why, it would be ruined! It would be in shreds! How can you even think
of treating it so!"

So Ivra shook her head until her funny little pigtails flopped from side
to side. "I don't want to wear it then for even a minute. What fun would
there be?"

"Well, think about it anyway," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch, and rose
to go away. "It's the fir, you know, beyond the white birch."

"Thank you for the stories," said the children.

"Good-by," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch. "Perhaps Eric will remember
and come. It's a gorgeous bird, and I haven't said he couldn't free it."

Then she slipped out into the snow flakes, turning to give them one
dancing look over her shoulder before the door swung to.

Up flamed the candles, clear high flames when she was gone, and the fire
crackled again, and took on new life, reaching higher and higher.

They got their supper together rather silently. But just before going to
sleep Ivra roused herself to say, "Let's promise each other we won't go
to the Beautiful Wicked Witch's fir until mother comes home,--and we can
tell her how jolly the Witch is, and what good stories she told us."

"I don't want to go anyway," answered Eric, "unless I can free the
bird."--But you see, he had not promised.

After a while, "Did you notice how pale her face was when she wasn't
laughing?" asked Eric.

"Yes, and not so beautiful then. Mother may come in the night, and we
never know it till morning!"

Soon they were asleep, a tired, but happy little girl and boy.

I think the Tree Mother sank down in her air-boat to look in at them and
open the door wide, which they had forgotten, so they would have fresh
air all night; but it was dark, and the room was shadowy, so perhaps it
was only the wind.




CHAPTER IX

THE WIND HUNT


After all, Mother Helma was not there the next morning,--nor the next,
nor the next. She did not come back for days and days and days. Much
happened before she returned, and much happened after. I will tell you.

During the days the children roamed the forest looking for their mother.
They asked every one they could find whether he had seen her. The Tree
Man, his daughter, the Bird Fairies, and the Forest Children, not one of
them had seen or heard of her since she went away. But they all said
with one accord that she would surely come back in her own time. It was
not wise to go seeking her so. She loved them. She would return.

"Wait and be patient," they said. "Time will bring Helma."

But they were Forest People, who live long, long lives, and see far.
Eric was an Earth Child, and Ivra was not all a Forest Child. So they
found it hard to be wise and wait and do nothing but trust Helma and
know she would return.

So they went wandering all the day. They did not go home for meals,
even, after a while, but ate with the Tree Man and his daughter or the
Forest Children. Sometimes as they walked through the forest, looking
all about, even up into the trees for their mother, they would suddenly
burst into play. "Tag," Ivra would cry, tapping Eric on the shoulder,
and away she would fly, he after her, in a race that grew merrier and
merrier as it ran on. Ivra darted and twisted away when Eric thought he
had her, rolling down little hills on the snow crust, climbing trees,
jumping brooks until he was lucky enough to catch her by one of her
pigtails at last, or snatch her flying skirt. "Tag!" Then away he sped,
and the game would go on for a happy while.

But sooner or later they always stopped running, stopped laughing, and
remembered why they were wandering the wood alone. Then they would call
for Helma. Ivra's voice was shrill and sweet, and rang through the bare
woods like a birdsong. Eric's wavered a little uncertainly, as though he
doubted whether Helma knew it well enough to answer. "Helma, Helma,
Helma! Ohh Helma! Helmaa-a!"

No Helma answered. Sometimes a Forest Child came running to say, "We
haven't seen her yet, Ivra. But we are watching." The Bird Fairies
fluttered at the call and nodded their little heads uneasily. Children's
voices calling for their mother was a sad sound, and made the kindly
little creatures restless. One or two of them would fly to nestle in
Ivra's neck and whisper, "Give her time. Do not hurry her so. She will
come back."

But the children were losing faith. They went calling, seeking and
playing through the woods all the hours of daylight. At night Ivra told
Eric World Stories, World Story after World Story until sleep made them
forget.

The fifth morning of their search dawned blue and clear and windy.

"The Wind Creatures will be happy to-day," said Ivra when she opened her
eyes and heard the wind pushing at all the windows of the house and saw
the blue morning sky. "Wild Star will be circling the world."

"Why, then he will see Helma somewhere!" cried Eric.

Ivra sprang from her bed. "Eric, how splendid! We must go with him! Why
didn't I think of it at the very first!"

They did not stop for breakfast, but were into their coats and ready for
the day's search in a twinkling. Neither of them had bothered to undress
the night before. Ivra's hair had gone unbrushed for two days. Things
like that are apt to slip when one's mother is away. So her little
pigtails were no longer smooth and glossy, but frowsy and loose, and the
rest of her hair was ruffled until it looked something like the Bird
Fairies' soft plumage. Eric's head, too, was shaggier than ever, and a
smudge from firebuilding had darkened one of his cheeks since the
morning before. They had not bathed in the "bird bath" since Helma had
gone away. They never seemed to have time, or else they were too sleepy.

Now they no more thought of baths than they thought of breakfast. Eric
followed Ivra, who knew all the ways in the forest, to the spot where
Wild Star was most likely to be, if he was to be found at all on such a
windy, perfect day. They ran earnestly, never slackening to skip or
play. And soon they came in sight of some giant cedar trees near the
edge of the forest. There were several Wind Creatures standing there,
laughing in shrill, glad voices, pointing with their arms, and flapping
their purple wings. Wind Creatures are growing-up boys and girls with
fairy-hearts and strong, never-tiring purple wings, remember. Wild Star
was among them.

But before the children had come up to them, the Wind Creatures suddenly
joined hands,--as they do just before flying,--and started running down
the sloping hill that ended the forest.

For a minute Ivra was in despair. "Now they are gone for the day to
circle the world, and I shall never find mother," she thought. But she
did not waste any more breath running. She stopped short and lifted her
voice, clear and insistent, "Wild Star! Wild Star! I need you! Don't run
away. Wild Star!"

The Wind Creatures had reached the foot of the hill, running swiftly
hand in hand, and their wings were already lifted for flying. But Wild
Star, at the sound of Ivra's voice, leaned back suddenly on the hands he
was holding, almost throwing his comrades on their faces, and breaking
the line. He turned right about, swinging the others with him, and came
leaping and running back.

"What is the matter, little comrade?" he asked. "What is the matter?"

"In all your flying 'round the world, Wild Star, you must have seen my
mother Helma. She is lost. Oh, can't you tell us where she is?"

"Yes, of course. But I didn't know she was lost. I thought she was
visiting Earth-friends."

"Truly, truly?" Ivra's eyes shone with joy, and Eric grabbed his cap
from his head and threw it up in the air shouting, "Hurrah!"

"Oh, will you bring her to us right away?" Ivra begged.

Wild Star looked doubtful. "Perhaps she wouldn't want to come."

Ivra laughed merrily at that. "Then take us to her," she said, "and you
will see how she wants to come when we ask her."

"Give us your hands, then!"

They held out their hands. Ivra's was grasped by Wild Star's and Eric's
by another Wind Creature. With their free hands they clasped each
other's. So the four started running down the hill, while the rest of
the Wind Creatures flew off over their heads.

Wild Star and his comrade ran faster and faster, until Eric wondered how
it was that he and Ivra were ever keeping up with them. Soon he realized
that his feet were scarcely touching the ground. At the foot of the hill
stood a little group of birches, and they were running right upon it. He
did not see how they could either turn out or stop themselves at that
speed. Almost as soon as he had seen the birches, though, they were
beyond them. They had not turned out, they had jumped right over the
birches, and they were much higher than Eric's head! They were running
so swiftly now that only their toes ever touched the ground,--if _they_
did.

What fun it was to run like that, the wind at their backs, and the Wind
Creatures drawing them strongly forward faster and faster and faster
until they were really flying just above the snow.

Across white fields they skimmed,--over fences and frozen streams,
bushes and banks, through orchards and meadows, on, on, on, until they
came to the town.

There Ivra pulled back for a minute, and the Wind Creatures slowed down.
Eric knew why Ivra was afraid of the town. She had told him all about it
while they played in the wood. Helma, her mother, was a human, but she
hated the town and loved the fairies and their ways. That was why she
had run away to live by herself in the wood. But Ivra was neither fairy
nor human; she was both.

Now the fairies are afraid of humans because humans look right through
them and do not see them. That upsets the fairies and makes them
uncomfortable. Of course Helma and Eric were exceptions, for because
they had no shadows in their eyes they could see them and play with
them. So the fairies accepted those two as one of themselves. Ivra was
different. Because she was only half fairy, any human could see her
whether his eyes were shadowed or not if he would only look hard enough.
The dreadful part was that when a human did see her, he was likely not
to believe in her. He would just think he was day-dreaming, and that the
little girl with the soft eyes, the ash-colored pigtails, and the quick
feet was just a piece of his day-dream. Not to be seen is bad enough.
But it is much worse to be seen and not believed in. That was why Ivra
was afraid of the town. People saw her there and either rubbed their
eyes and looked another way, or laughed.

But now she was going for her mother, and she could bear anything, even
that. She did not hold back long. They ran past the canning factory, and
Eric did not give a glance to it. A little girl looking out over a pile
of cans saw him, however, and wondered at his warm suit of brown cloth,
his leggins, sandals and the cap with wings. She remembered him in rags.
She saw Ivra too, and did not rub her eyes and think her a dream. But
she did not call to any one in the factory or point, for she knew _they_
would think it a dream.

Through the crooked narrow streets, past the crooked narrow houses,--one
of them Mrs. Freg's,--they sped faster than the wind! On, on, on,--up
the wide avenue through the "residential section" where big houses eyed
them from proud terraces,--out into the country again they raced.

There they came to a high gray stone wall, blocking their way, and stood
still.

"You must climb," said Wild Star. "She is in there."




CHAPTER X

ON THE GRAY WALL


It was a very high wall that hid their mother, and at first glance it
seemed impossible that they could ever climb it. But Ivra did not stop
to wonder. She ran up and down, hunting for a foothold. At last she
reached the end of the wall and disappeared around the corner. Eric and
the Wind Creatures followed. When they came up to her she had already
found a place where the stones were laid a bit unevenly, one on the
other, and was half way to the top, clinging with toes and fingers.

"Bravo!" cried the Wind Creatures. Eric went up after her, often
slipping back and bruising and scratching his hands and knees, but as
resolute as his playmate. At last they gained the top. The Wind
Creatures had flown up and were waiting for them there, sitting
cross-legged with their purple wings folded down their backs.

The wall enclosed the garden of a very rich family. It was a formal
garden with straight walks, trellises, fountains, benches and neat
flower beds laid out in squares and circles, now piled high with
blossoming snow.

Just as the children reached the top of the wall, the door into the
garden from the stern gray mansion behind it opened and through it came
three people. First was a very tall lady all wrapped up in furs,--tails
and heads of the poor animals that had been slain to make them hanging
from her shoulders and down her back. Even the children could see that
her face was sour in spite of all its smiling. Then came a young man in
a stiff, funny hat, carrying a cane, beating up the snow flowers with it
as he passed the flower beds. And behind them walked--Helma, with her
gaze on the ground. That is why they did not know her at first, that and
her very strange clothes. She was dressed all in velvet and fur, and her
arms up to her elbows were hidden in a huge white muff. She swayed as
she walked on weird little high heels and the toes of her boots drew out
to long points, almost like a goblin's. Her hat was a velvet affair, so
awkward and heavy it seemed to weigh down her head, and her candleflame
hair was smothered under it. Is it any wonder that they did not know her
like that!

But when she walked close under the wall and they heard her voice they
knew her, and the Wind Creatures had to hold Ivra from jumping down and
throwing herself into her arms. "Wait," they whispered.

From their high place on the wall they could look down on the heads of
the three people, and hear all they were saying. They had never learned
that it is not fair to listen that way.

From all Helma said they could plainly see she was a prisoner. She was
pleading with the old woman. She was saying, "No, never, never, never,
in a thousand days and years will I ever be happy here. My place is in
the forest. Oh, how these heels bother!"

"Silly girl!" cried the old woman, smiling more than ever, and looking
more disagreeable than ever at the same time. "Your place is where you
were born-in a fine house and wearing clothes like other people. Heels
indeed! Did you expect them to do any thing else but bother? Mine have
bothered for sixty years, but you haven't heard _me_ complain."

"Neither would I," Helma said, "if I didn't know about other kinds of
shoes that don't hurt. Those sandals I wore when you caught me didn't
hurt. Why can't I wear those, at least when I walk in the garden?"

"Well, you might," began the old woman, a little more kindly, and
smiling less, "if you promise always to put on the high heels before
coming into the drawing room--"

"No," said the young man sharply. "Let her once into the garden in her
sandals and she'll climb the wall and be off. I say that we give her no
chance to escape. After she has been to a hundred or so balls and worn
these beautiful and appropriate clothes long enough she'll be glad of
her luck, and nothing could drag her into the forest. Believe me!"

Now Helma stopped pleading, and laughed at the young man. "Do you think
high heels, or even a hat that weighs down my head like this horrid one
can keep me much longer from my little daughter, and that dear new
little boy? What they are doing without me all this time--I wonder!" She
stopped laughing to sigh.

The old woman took her hand not unkindly. "My poor, dear girl," she
said, "how many times must I tell you it is only a dream, that house in
the woods and the little girl and boy? They aren't really there at all,
you know. You have dreamed them. Come, cheer up. Be a brave girl. We
have parties and good times enough here, if you will only get into the
spirit of them, to make up for all your forest foolishness."

Helma answered in a low even voice, that showed well enough how sure she
was of the truth of what she was saying--"No, they are realer than you.
Ivra is realer than all the people in that mansion put together,
cousins, uncles, aunts, guests, servants and all. She is my little fairy
daughter."

"No," said the young man.

The wings of the Wind Creatures on the top of the wall rustled just then
in a gust of cold north wind. Helma threw up her head as at a familiar
sound, and her eyes slowly lifted to the faces of the children looking
down. For a minute she looked steadily at them without believing, and
then it was as though her pale face suddenly burst into song. But the
old woman and the young man were not looking at her and so they noticed
nothing. The young man said, "The neighbors have talked about us enough
already for all your queer ideas and doings. So you'll wear no sandals,
no, nor sleep with your skylight open, as you're always asking, nor go
one step outside the wall until you have come to your senses and are
more like other people. So there!"

But Helma laughed, her head thrown back, so that the children could look
into her happy eyes and see the glow of her short hair under her
grotesque hat.

"Keep your keys, cousin," she said, "and your old skylight keep shut
tight as tight. I shall find a way out. But my children must be patient,
and Ivra must teach Eric to keep his face and body clean. They must not
forget meal-times, and when anything goes wrong, or they think it is
going wrong, they must ask the Tree Man's advice. I will find a way to
them soon. They must keep happy and wait."

She said all that slowly and distinctly, her eyes smiling into theirs.

"What silly talk," laughed the sour old lady. "Just as though you were
making a speech. Well, it must be luncheon time now, and high time we
were changing our frocks. Wear your gray velvet, Helma, and don't forget
to put on stockings to match. There's to be strawberry ice to-day,--and
goose to begin with of course. Cook says she has never seen a
tenderer--"

The old lady went on talking about the wonderful luncheon they were to
have until they were out of hearing. But the children on the gray wall
could see that Helma was going in differently from the way she had come
out. Her head was high, and she stepped out in her funny high heeled
boots as though she were walking in sandals. At the little door into the
mansion she turned and waved her queer great muff to the children and
the Wind Creatures, and they heard her laugh.

But when she was gone, and the door was shut and locked--they heard the
great key scrape--Eric turned joyfully to Ivra. She was staring intently
at the closed door, her face very pale. Suddenly she buried her head in
her arms and burst into sobs, hoarse, jerky sobs, the first and the last
time Eric was ever to hear her cry. Eric and the Wind Children sat
cross-legged and waited. Soon she stopped and wiped her face on her
sleeve.

"She is locked in, but she _will_ find a way home," she said, almost
laughing. "How glad and how surprised she was to see us! It was almost
as though she had begun to believe all their talk about dreams, until
she heard the Wind Creatures' wings!"

The Wind Creatures took them back to the forest. Under the giant cedars
they said good-by and left them. The children went straight to the Tree
Man's to tell him the news. He gave them deep bowls of warm milk to
drink, and took off their sandals so that their toes might spread and
warm in front of the fire.

Then the Tree Girl begged for a story, and Ivra told a World Story about
the rivers,--how they go in search of their mother, the ocean, day and
night, around mountains and through mountains, and across whole
continents, and never stop until they find her,--and of the myriad
presents they carry to her,--of the things they see and the things they
do, as they flow searching.

It was a long story. And almost before the end the little story teller
had fallen asleep with her head tipped back against the Tree Man's
chest.

They spent that night in the tree, and that was good, for a storm had
risen outside, and it was bitter cold in the forest.




CHAPTER XI

THE BEAUTIFUL WICKED WITCH


The next morning before Eric woke Ivra slipped away to play with the
Forest Children.

"On such wild days as this they usually play indoors, for they're little
things and the Snow Witches love to tease them," said the Tree Man.

"Perhaps she'll be telling them World Stories," thought Eric, and so he
decided to go to the little moss village, too, for though Ivra had told
him dozens of World Stories by now, he always wanted to hear more. So
after breakfast with the Tree Man and his pretty, shy daughter, he ran
out in search of Ivra.

It was indeed a cold morning, blustering and raw. Eric felt chilled
almost as soon as he was out of doors. Very soon he lost his way, for he
had not been in the forest long enough to grow familiar with landmarks.
Just when he was beginning to be a bit hopeless and pinched with the
cold he came to the big fir where the Beautiful Wicked Witch lived. It
stood green and comforting among all the bare trees of winter.

Eric stopped to look, for now he remembered the Beautiful Wicked Witch
and the bird she had caged in there. He saw a door in the tree trunk
ajar, and swinging to and fro with tiny tinkling music. He peeped in,
and between the swingings caught glimpses of little blue and yellow
flowers arranged in tight bunches in hanging vases. He could smell their
sweetness even out there in the cold air.

Then high up in the tree trunk a window opened, and he heard the bird
singing. The Beautiful Wicked Witch's face appeared at the window,
looking down at him. Her black eyes were sparkling and she nodded
good-morning to him as though he were a prince, or at least a grown-up.
He could not help nodding back. He liked her very much, she was so
beautiful and so friendly.

"Come in and get warm," she called, "and I'll show you my pretty bird."

Eric remembered Ivra's warnings, but he wanted to go in so much that he
found himself doing it. The door tinkled louder music when he touched
it, and he pushed his way through, as a bee pushes his way into a
flower.

The Witch came running twinklingly down a spiral stairway. She kissed
his mouth, took off his winged cap and coat, threw them somewhere out of
sight, and then he had time to look at her well.

Her gown was green satin, the color of the fir boughs, and her little
sandals were green satin, too. A green fir frond bound her forehead; and
her black hair hung loose, soft and electric to her waist. Eric had
never seen a prettier person in the world, nor one more kind.

She took his two hands and began to whirl in a happy dance. Eric danced,
too, for joy and good comradeship. Round and round the room they whirled
until their breath was spent.

Then the Beautiful Wicked Witch took him up the spiral staircase to show
him the bird. Up and up they went, until they came to a little room high
in the tree. The floor was carpeted with yellow satin, and yellow
curtains hung at the window. Deep blue mirrors lined the walls, and they
reflected Eric and the Beautiful Wicked Witch dozens of times over.

The pretty bird cage, all made of flowers and leaves, hung in the very
middle of the room. Eric stood by it a long time. He put his fingers
through the bars, and stroked the bird's soft feathers. But the gorgeous
bird paid no attention to him, and did not sing.

"Why doesn't it hop about?" he asked the Beautiful Wicked Witch.

The Witch frowned and pouted. "It ought to, I'm sure. I like to see it
hopping. But it would rather sulk. It thinks all the time about the
forest, and its mate who is out there somewhere. Sometimes it sings,
though. Its voice is wonderful."

"Oh, let's open the cage and free him," cried Eric.

But the Beautiful Wicked Witch seized his hand. "No, no, _no_! It is
_mine_. I have caged it in my pretty cage. And it fits into the room,
don't you think?"

"I don't know what you mean," said Eric.

"Why, you fit into it, too," said the Witch, looking hard at him. "Your
yellow hair and blue eyes match the yellow and blue flowers. Would you
like me to make a pretty cage for you and put you into it?"

"No, no!" Eric was suddenly afraid of the Beautiful Wicked Witch.

But she laughed at his fear, and danced a little dance, humming to
herself, around the room. Then Eric noticed other cages. The walls were
lined with them. Some hung from the ceiling, and some stood in corners.
In every cage was a bird or animal. The one standing nearest to him held
a pretty gray squirrel, running 'round and 'round on a wheel. He stopped
every now and then to peer out through the bars with quick, bright eyes.
In the cage next was a tiny brown field mouse. But he had given up
running and playing long ago, and was huddled in the farthest and
darkest corner of his cage, his little beady eyes open and watchful.

Eric walked around the room, looking at all the poor little animals and
birds. One and all peered through their bars with watchful and fearful
eyes. Eric remembered himself in the canning factory and pitied them
more than he could ever have done had he not once been a caged little
creature too. How he longed to open their doors and the window, and see
them scamper and fly away!

But the Witch had stopped her dancing by the bird cage in the middle of
the room, and her little hands were between the bars stroking the bright
bird-breast. She was saying, "Sing for us, bird. Sing your nicest song
for us. Little Eric wants to hear it."

The bird began to beat its wings and breast against the bars. Again and
again its bright breast struck the door. But it did not fly open.

"It does not want to sing," laughed the Beautiful Wicked Witch; "but it
must. Sing, bird, sing! It does you no good to struggle. You can't get
away. Sing, sing!"

Then the bird sang. Its song was truly wonderful, high and clear, as
Eric had heard it from outside. But now that he could see the bird caged
he did not like the song so well. It was all too sad.

Eric wanted to go away then, out of the tree, and never, never see the
Witch again. He would find Ivra and the Forest Children and forget all
about these cages. So he said good-by to the Witch and ran down the
spiral staircase. But he could not find the door out. He went round and
round the wall, but there was no sign of a door. It was indeed as though
a flower had let him in and then closed its petals tight.

The little posies swung in their cases, the bird sang up stairs, and the
Beautiful Wicked Witch played and danced, and laughed at all his
searching. She would do nothing to help him find the door.

All that day he wandered up stairs and down stairs, or stood at the
window looking down through the green fir branches to the free
forest-floor. Once the Witch offered to tell him stories. But he wanted
no stories of caged things, and those were all the stories she knew. The
Witch did not mind his short answers and dark face. She seemed perfectly
able to have a good time with herself, and needed no comrades.

At last night fell. The rooms blossomed with candlelight. In the yellow
room up stairs the Beautiful Wicked Witch paraded back and forth before
the mirrors, loving her own reflection, smiling at herself, courtesying,
frowning, looking back over her shoulder,--lifting her hair to let it
fall again in electric waves. Eric stood by the window, thoroughly weary
of his search and loneliness, and watched her. The bird sat in the cage
and watched her. All the little bright eyes of animals watched her. The
candles burned steadily.

How Eric longed for Ivra now, and their own big friendly room. He
imagined Ivra in the room there all alone getting her supper over the
fire, bathing in the fountain bath, opening the windows, and at last
falling softly to sleep before the firelight faded.

Oh, if there were only a window open here! How hot it was, and how
over-sweetly scented! The Beautiful Wicked Witch went on posing and
preening before the mirrors, and seemed to have forgotten all about her
new little prisoner.

So he pulled back the yellow satin curtain, and looked out. It was
clear, cold starlight. He pressed his face against the window pane and
stared down into the shadows beneath the fir. And there, standing erect
in the shadow, her face lifted like a pale little moon, stood Ivra.

She saw him, but did not wave. She only nodded, as though she knew now
what she had come to make sure of. She stood still for a few minutes,
until Eric almost thought she was frozen in the cold. But at last she
moved and disappeared under the fir.

Music tinkled through the house. The Beautiful Wicked Witch poised on
her toes, surprisedly looking into the reflection of her own eyes.

"Some one has come in, for that was the door," she said. "It opens
inward with music."

Eric's heart stood still. Had Ivra come into the Witch's house, Ivra who
was so afraid of the Witch? He ran down the stairs and the Witch
followed him. Yes, Ivra stood there in the middle of the warm,
flower-hung room, like a little cold star beam.

But she did not look at the quaint flowers in their golden vases. And
when the Witch ran to her and kissed her she did not even look at her.
She looked only at Eric, and her eyes said, "I have come to free you."

"Oh, so you did want to try on the pretty frock after all," cried the
Witch, and drew her up the stairs. Eric followed to the yellow room.
"No," said Ivra. But the Witch brought it out and tried to slip it over
her head. It was sheerest gossamer web, and shimmered like moonlight.
And the little rosebuds seemed to make it belong to Ivra.

Eric forgot all about being a prisoner, and forgot the little caged
creatures around the wall. He was delighted with the frock being pushed
down on Ivra's shoulders. "How beautiful you'll be!" he cried. But Ivra
wriggled away from it and stood clear. Her rudely made brown frock and
worn sandals looked odd in that satin room. "I didn't come to see the
frock," she said, shaking her head till her pigtails bobbed. "I came to
get Eric."

The Beautiful Wicked Witch laughed. "Get him if you can," she said. Then
she turned her back on the children and began to braid her black hair
among the mirrors.

They went to the window and waited there, watching her.

"The door doesn't open out,--only in, I think," Eric whispered. "So we
can't get out."

"Mother has told me how it would be," Ivra whispered back. "We'll have
to wait until she's asleep and then find a way."

Then Ivra sat down on the floor and began to rock back and forth and
sing a lullaby. It was a lullaby her mother had sung to her all her
babyhood, Ivra sang in a very little voice, almost a murmur only, but by
listening Eric and the Beautiful Wicked Witch could catch the words. She
sang the same words over and over and over.

  Night is in the forest,
    Tree Mother is nigh.
  By-abye, by-abye-bye.

  Sleep is in the forest--
    His feathers brush your eye.
  By-abye, by-abye-bye.

  Mother's arms are holding you,
    Forest dreams are folding you.
  By-abye, by-abye--bye.

The Beautiful Wicked Witch sat down before the mirrors after a while,
still watching her reflection, but listening to the song, too. Her head
gradually sank lower and lower, first resting chin in hand and at last
right down on her arm stretched along the floor. Her face lay turned
towards the children, and they saw the mirth slowly fade in her great
black eyes, the lids drop lower and lower,--and then she was asleep
suddenly. Now she looked almost as young as themselves, and like a pale
child who has fallen to sleep at its play.

But the children did not stop to look at her. Once they were sure she
was asleep they were off searching for the door. Up and down the stairs
and all around the rooms they ran on tiptoes. But it was no use, and at
last they came back to the window.

"We must jump," whispered Ivra.

Eric looked down, and wondered. It was a long way to the ground!

"The snow is soft beneath the crust," Ivra said. "It will only cut us a
little."

"Let's take the bird," Eric said. Ivra ran to it, and opened the cage
door. It hopped onto her finger eagerly, and she held its bill so that
it would not sing.

Eric opened the window. "I'll jump first," he whispered.

But Ivra said, "Oh, let's hold hands and jump together."

The Beautiful Wicked Witch felt the cold night air from the window on
her face, and stirred in her sleep. Her eyelids quivered. So the
children did not wait a minute more. They climbed up onto the window
sill, Ivra still holding the bird. "One, two, three," she whispered, and
they jumped.

Out and down they went like two shooting stars and plunked through the
snowcrust. They were up in a second. Their wrists and elbows were a
little bruised and cut, but they were not really hurt at all. But
strange and strange, the bird had fluttered near Ivra's hand for that
second, and then flew straight back up and into the open window. It had
been caged so long it did not really want its freedom after all. Eric
cried out with regret.

But Ivra seized his hand, and they ran home together through the cold,
starlit forest. Before they leapt the hedge into their own garden Eric
saw the firelight blossoming in the windows. But he stood still outside
the door, after Ivra had gone in, for a time, breathing the cold air and
the clear silence right down into his toes.




CHAPTER XII

IVRA'S BIRTHDAY


"To-morrow is the shortest day in the year," Ivra told Eric one night
after they were in bed. He did not answer, for he was very sleepy. But
after a minute she spoke again. "It's my birthday too!"

Then he opened his eyes and sat up, for her voice sounded very queer and
far away. He saw that she too was sitting up, her hands folded under her
chin. "Mother always had a party for me," she said. "Such fun!"

"Perhaps one will happen to-morrow even with her away," Eric comforted.
"Oh, goody! I do hope so!"

"Perhaps. Anyway I'm going to pretend there's a party waiting for me
to-morrow. You pretend too, Eric, and then even if it doesn't come true
we will have had the pretending at least."

Eric agreed to pretend. It was one of his favorite games. And very soon
the two children nestled down under their covers and drifted into sleep
and dreams of a party.

They were roused early in the morning by something tapping lightly on
the doors and windows. Eric was out of bed first, and saw the Wind
Creatures, half a dozen or more of them, looking in and beckoning. Their
purple wings gleamed gold in the early morning sun. Wild Star was
standing in the open door.

"Happy birthday!" he cried and tossed a snow ball into Ivra's bed. She
popped to her knees, laughing and rosy with sleep. But then she was
grave in a minute. "There's to be no party, Wild Star," she said.
"Mother's not back yet. Are you all here for that?"

"Yes, we're here for that, and there is to be a party, an all day one
too. Your Forest Friends have seen to that."

The children were radiant with joy. And Ivra whispered to Eric, "We had
our pretending, too!"

The Wind Creatures would not come in to breakfast, for of course they do
not like in-doors at all, and besides, they need very little food. So
they played in the garden while the children dressed and ate. Very soon
the children were done, though, and came leaping out ready for a day's
joy.

The Wind Creatures led them then out through the forest. The Tree Girl
was watching for them at her door. It was plain to be seen, when she
joined them, that she carried something in her arms very secretly under
her white cloak. But no one mentioned it. Ivra knew it must be a
surprise for her birthday. Where the party was to be no one told her,
and she did not ask. She liked surprises.

They came to the Forest Children's little moss village. The youngest
Forest Child of all was the only one up so early. He was busily breaking
dead twigs from bushes to build his morning fire and making up a little
rhymeless song about Ivra's birthday as he worked.

  This is her birthday,
  Spring's little daughter--
  Spring's little daughter--
  This is her birthday.

  Wake now, wake now,
  All you Forest Children,
  Wake for her birthday
  And tie your sandals on.

When he saw them he cried, "Hurrah! Happy birthday, Ivra!"

At his cry all the little windows in the little moss houses opened and
there were the tousled heads of the Forest Children, their eyes blinking
sleepily against the gilded morning light.

"Thank you, thank you," Ivra cried back to the youngest Forest Child.
"Hurry and follow."

Before they had gone on their way five minutes more the Forest Children
were up with them, tugging at buckles and sandal strings as they ran,
begging not to be left behind. Soon they came to Big Pine Hill, a hill
deep in the forest with no trees but a giant pine at the top. The Wind
Creatures had built a slide there by brushing away the snow and leaving
a broad track of shining blue ice. Up under the pine were sleds enough
for every one, made all of woven hemlock branches. They needed no
runners for the ice was so slippery and the hill so steep _anything_
would go down it fast enough. Ivra's Forest Friends must have worked all
the day before to make those sleds--and now her shining face and clasped
hands were reward enough.

She was the first to try the hill. She threw herself on her sled and
down she flashed. At the bottom she tumbled off, and still on her knees
shouted up to Eric and the others at the top, "Oh, it's splendid! Come
on!"

Then the hill was covered with speeding sleds. The Bird Fairies had none
of their own, for they were so little they might have come to harm on
that hill. But they had just as good a time for all of that, catching
rides with the others, clinging to shoulders or heads or feet as it
happened.

Every one was there, even the Snow Witches who had not been invited.
They came whirling and dancing through the forest almost as soon as the
sliding had begun. Ivra gave them glad welcome in spite of their rough
ways and stinging hair. For she, the only one of all who were there,
liked them very well and had made them her comrades often and often on
windy winter days. And they, who cared for nobody, cared for her. "She
is not like anybody," they explained it to each other. "_She is a great
little girl_."

But they would not take Ivra's sled as she wanted them to. They had not
come to spoil her fun. Instead they raced down the hill behind her or
before her, pushing and pulling, their stinging hair in her face. But
that only made her cheeks very red, and she did not mind them at all.
Then she tried sliding down on her feet, with the long line of witches
pushing from behind, their hands on each other's shoulders. That was the
best fun of all, and almost always ended in a tumble before the bottom
was reached. Though the others avoided the witches as much as they could
they admired Ivra for such hardy comrading.

Before noon every one was very hungry. Then the littlest Forest Child
said, "Follow me. The Tree Girl has gone ahead."

It was true, she had slipped away when no one noticed.

The littlest Forest Child led them away to a little valley-place where
hemlock boughs had been spread to make a floor and raised on three sides
to make a shelter. When they had come close enough for Ivra to see what
it was perched so big and white in the middle of the hemlock floor she
stopped and sighed with joy while she clasped her hands.

It was a beautiful frosted birthday cake with nine brave candles of all
colors and burning steadily, just the kind of cake her mother had always
baked for her birthdays.--Only last year there had been eight candles.
She had not hoped for this final delight. She ran quickly forward and
was the first to kneel down by it. The Tree Girl was there waiting, and
now Ivra knew it was the cake that she had been carrying so secretly
under her cloak.

The Snow Witches did not follow into that shelter. They have a great
fear of shelters, you must know, for when forced into them they quickly
lose their fierceness, and their fierceness is their greatest pride. But
before they left the party one of them came close to Eric, so close that
tears were whipped into his eyes and quickly froze on his lashes. "Take
this to your little comrade," shes said, thrusting a box made of pine
cones into his hands. "It's for her to keep her paper dolls in. We
witches made it."

Then all the witches went screeching and swirling away through the
forest, and Ivra, Eric and the others settled down to the business of
eating the birthday cake.

But first the Tree Girl, who is very sensible, insisted that they eat
some nuts and apples. Indeed, she would allow no one a bite of the
wonderful cake until he had eaten at least one apple and twenty nuts.

Before Ivra cut the cake the others blew out the candles, one after
another, and made her a wish in turn for every candle. The Tree Girl
wished her a bright new year, the Bird Fairies that her mother would
soon return, the Wind Creatures that she would keep her gay heart
forever, the Forest Children that she would become the most famous story
teller in the Forest World.

And then it was Eric's turn. He had never been to a birthday party
before, and never had he made a wish for some one else. So he was a
little puzzled. But at last he had an idea and cried, "I wish that your
hair will grow golden and curly before to-morrow morning." All
princesses Ivra had ever told him about had curly golden hair, and
though she had never said it, Eric had suspected for some time that Ivra
would like that kind of hair herself. Then he puffed his cheeks and blew
out his candle, a fat green one. Ivra laughed.

"The Snow Witches would never let me keep curly hair," she said. "They'd
whip it straight in an hour."

That reminded Eric of the pine cone box and he gave it to her and told
her about it. She was almost as delighted with that as with the cake.

What a wonderful cake it was! Such food Eric had never dreamed of, and
he was a great dreamer! The frosting was over an inch thick.

Then, of course, Ivra must tell them stories. All the Forest People
loved her stories. They built a fire to keep from freezing. The Wind
Creatures sat a little way off where it was cool enough for their
comfort, but not too far to hear Ivra's clear voice. This time she told
all she knew about the birthday of this Earth, one of the most magical
and splendid and strange of her stories.

But it was the shortest day in the year, Ivra's birthday, and night fell
all too soon. Then the Tree Girl, who seldom forgot to be sensible, said
they had better go home. The littlest Forest Child was already asleep,
curled close by the fire. They roused him gently. Good-nights were
called and a few minutes after, the shelter was deserted, and the fire
out. And by starlight could be seen many footprints leading away in the
white snow out into all parts of the Forest.

Eric and Ivra walked toward home hand in hand. They had to pass the
morning's slide on the way. When they came in sight of it they began to
walk more quickly and quietly and to look intently. The blue ice shone
bluer than ever in starlight, but more than the ice shone. Shining
_people_ were using the sleds and the hill was covered with them.

"Why, they must be Star People," Ivra cried excitedly.

When they were quite near they stood to watch.

The strange Star folk were very silent, never calling and laughing as
those who had slid there in the morning had done. Two, a little boy and
a young girl, came spinning down on the same sled and stopped so near
that Ivra and Eric might have touched them by leaning forward. But the
Star-two must have thought the Forest-two shadows, for they paid no
attention to them at all.

Now that they were so near Eric could see that their hair was blue, like
the shadows on snow, and their faces a beautiful shining white. Their
straight short garments were blue like shadows, too, and their arms,
legs and feet were bare. But they did not seem conscious of the cold.
Eric did not hear them speak, but they looked at each other as though
they _were_ speaking, and then suddenly the little boy laughed merrily,
as though the young girl had just told him something very amusing.

Soon the girl turned and ran away up the hill. But the little boy was as
quick as she and threw himself on the sled while she never slackened her
pace, but drew him straight and fast up the steep slope.

"I have never seen them before," Ivra whispered to Eric. "But mother has
told me of them. They don't talk as we do you see. They don't _have_ to.
They know each other's thoughts. They almost never leave their Stars. Do
you think--perhaps, to-night they saw our slide shining, and wondered so
much about it they had to come down? Even mother has never seen them.
It was Tree Mother told her."

Eric was very silent, for he had never seen such beautiful people. The
little boy had had a face like a star, and great shining eyes. The young
girl had been clear like the day, and without smiling her face had been
brimmed with happiness.

But now he felt Ivra trembling. She whispered again, "You know, Eric, it
is wonderful for us to see them like this. Some day, mother says, we may
get to be like them!"

"And speak without words?" Eric asked wondering.

"Yes, and more than that. We may be as _alive_ as they. Now we're only
Forest people, and not all _that_ even--almost dreams. They are _real_!"

Then she took his hand and drew him away. "I cannot look any more," she
said; "can you? They are too beautiful!"

Eric put his fingers to his eyes as he walked. "Yes, it's hard to see
the ground now. My eyes ache a little."

But how the children wished their mother were waiting for them in the
little house to hear the tale!




CHAPTER XIII

NORA'S GRANDCHILDREN


One afternoon Eric and Ivra started out for the Forest Children's moss
village to play with them. But when they got there they found all the
little houses deserted: not a Forest Child was to be found. They must
have gone into some other part of the forest to play. So Ivra and Eric
wandered on and on, a little lonely, a little tired of just each other
for comrades, till at last they came to the very edge of the
forest,--and there was Nora's farm, a rambling red brick house, with a
barn twice its size behind it. Down in the pasture by the house half a
dozen Snow Witches were dancing in a circle, now near, now far, all over
the pasture, and sometimes right up to the farm-house windows.

Ivra clapped her hands and bounded forward. Eric did not follow. He
stood to watch. When the Snow Witches saw Ivra running to them they
rushed to meet her. For a minute she was lost in a cloud of blown snow,
and then there she was dancing in their circle back and forth across the
pasture, and then away, away, away! But before she frolicked quite out
of sight she turned to look for her playfellow, and beckoned to him.

"Come on," she called. "We're going to slide on the brook below the
cornfield."

But Eric did not follow. He did not like the Snow Witches. And just as
Ivra and the Witches drifted out of sight, he thought he heard the
Forest Children laughing. The sound came from the barn. So Eric ran to
the door. It was a big sliding door, and now stood open on a crack just
large enough for a child to slip through. Eric went in.

The barn was tremendously big, a great dusty place full of the smell of
hay. Ahead of him were two stalls, with a horse in one. But Eric was
most interested in the empty stall, for it was from there the laughter
seemed to come. He stood looking and listening, and then right down
through the ceiling of the stall shot a child, and landed laughing and
squealing in the hay in the manger. She sat up, saw Eric and stared. She
was a little girl about his own age, freckle-faced, snub-nosed and
red-haired. She had the jolliest, the nicest face in the world.

Eric opened his mouth to say, "Hello," but kept it open, silent in
amazement, for another child had shot through the ceiling and landed
beside the girl. This was a boy. He was red-headed, too, freckle-faced
and snub-nosed. He looked even jollier than the girl.

Before Eric had closed his mouth on his amazement, "Whoop!" and down
came another boy. This boy was red-haired, freckle-faced and snub-nosed,
and he looked jollier than the other two put together, if that were
possible, for his red hair curled in saucy, tight little ringlets, and
his mouth was wide with smiles.

It was this last one who said, "Hello, who are you?"

"Eric,--who are you?"

"Nora's grandchildren, of course. Come up. We're having sport."

The three children ran across the barn to a ladder and scrambled up and
disappeared through a trap door at the top. Eric followed. The attic was
full of hay in mountains and little hills,--hay and hay and hay. He
followed the children around the biggest mountain, through a tunnel--and
there they vanished!

He found the hole in the stable ceiling and looked down. Not very far
below him was the manger full of hay and red-headed children. "Look out
down there! Whoop!" cried Eric, and dropped, landing among them.

Then the four laughed heartily together and ran across the barn again,
up the ladder, around the hay mountain and dropped down the hole. They
did that dozens of times until they were tired of it.

Then they played hide-and-go-seek in the hay country, and after that
Blind Man's Buff in the barn below. The little girl was Blind Man first.
They tied a red handkerchief tight over her eyes. Then they ran about,
dodging her, calling her, laughing at her groping hands and hesitating
steps. But after a few minutes she became accustomed to the darkness and
ran and jumped about after them until they had to be very wary and swift
indeed. Soon she caught Eric and then he was Blind Man.

By and by they played tag, just plain tag, and Eric liked that best of
all. Back and forth across the great room they raced,--up the ladder,
over the hay, through the hole into the stable, round and round, in and
out, up and down until they were too tired and hot for any more.

Then they lay up in the hay where there was a little window, looking far
out across the meadows.

Eric saw Ivra out there in the first field, wandering around alone and
now and then looking up at the barn. She must have heard their shouts
and laughter. He pointed her out to the other children. "That is my
playmate out there," he said. "Let's open the window and call to her to
come up. She'll tell us stories."

The children looked out eagerly. "But there's nobody there," they said.

Eric laughed. "No, look!" He pointed with his finger. "Over there by the
white birch. Look! She sees us." He waved. "Quick, help me open the
window."

He could not find the catch. The window was draped with cobwebs and
dusty with the dust of years. It looked as though it had never been
opened.

The little red-headed girl put her hand on his arm. She was laughing.
"Don't be silly," she said. "There's no one by the white birch. You're
imagining."

"Why, look! Of course she's there!" Eric was impatient. "She's moving
now, waving to us. Of course you see her!"

"Yes," said the jolliest of the boys. "We do see it--faintly. We've seen
it before too,--a kind of a shadow on the snow. But father says it's
nothing to mind. Imaginings. Nothing real, just spots in our eyes or
something."

Then Eric remembered all that Ivra had told him. She was half fairy.
People could see her if they looked hard enough. But they were not apt
to believe their own eyes when they had looked. That was dreadful for
her. She had not said so, but he had guessed it from her face when she
told him. Well, well, now he understood a little better. These were
Earth Children, with shadows in their eyes. Ivra could never be their
playmate.

But _he_ could see her well enough because his eyes were clear. And
presently he would run out to her and they would go home together. But
just now it was jolly and cozy here in the barn, and these Earth
Children were good fun. He hoped she would wait for him, but if she did
not he would find his way alone easily enough.

"You don't really believe in it, do you?" the red-headed girl was
asking. "If you do,--better not. Grown-ups will laugh at you."

"Nora, your grandmother, won't laugh," said Eric. "She knows Ivra well
enough, and Helma, too."

"Oh, yes," said the jolliest boy. "But she is queer. We love her, and
she's a fine grandmother, I can tell you. And she tells the best
stories. But she's queer just the same, and she can't fool us."

"Let's go in and get some cookies from her," said the other boy. "They
must be done by now."

So up they hopped, and without another look towards the shadow out on
the snow by the white birch, jumped down the hole, and ran out of the
barn into the kitchen.

Nora was there knitting by a table, two big pans of cookies just out of
the oven cooling in front of her.

How good they smelled! Eric had never tasted hot ginger cookies before,
and when Nora gave him one, a big round one all for his own, he almost
danced with delight. He perched on the edge of the table and ate that
one and many another before he was done.

"This boy, grandma," began the red-headed girl.

"His name is Eric," interrupted Nora, handing him another cookie. "I
know him very well."

"Well, he saw It while we were looking out of the barn window! And he
said It was real and his playmate, and he wanted to call It in to tell
us stories!"

"Don't say 'It,'" said Nora. "Her name is 'Ivra.' But of course you
can't play with her. She isn't an Earth Child. She's a fairy. So don't
say anything about it to your father when he comes home to-night. It
would make him cross."

"But it doesn't make you cross," laughed the jolliest boy. "And so won't
you tell us some stories about it now. You know,--the little house in
the wood, the Tree Man, the Forest Children, Helma, Ivra and all the
rest of it."

"Do tell us a story," begged the other two.

So Nora put down her knitting, and taking the cat on her lap, a great
sleepy white fellow who had been purring by the stove, she began to tell
them stories.

She told stories about Helma and Ivra, the Wind Creatures, the Snow
Witches and many more. The children listened eagerly, clapping their
hands now and then, and at the end of every story asking for more.

But Eric was lost in wonder. The children thought the stories were not
true,--just fairy stories told them by a grandmother. And Nora had
evidently long ago given up expecting them to believe. Her black eyes
twinkled knowingly when they met Eric's puzzled ones.

And all the time Eric had only to turn his head to see Ivra walking out
there around in the field, looking at the farm house, waiting for him.
But gradually, as the stories went on the little figure out there grew
more and more to look like just a blue shadow on the snow, paler and
paler. Finally he had to strain his eyes to see it at all.

Then he jumped down from the table and said he must go home. His heart
was beating a little wildly. For he was afraid Ivra might fade away from
him altogether. These red-headed children were fine playfellows. He
liked them,--oh, so much! He wished he could stay and play with them
for--a week. Yes. But he must go now. That blue shadow on the snow
seemed lonely.

"Take her some cookies," said Nora, filling his pockets. The children
laughed at the top of their voices. "Yes, take some cookies to the
fairy. But you can eat them yourself and pretend it is the fairy eating
them," they cried.

Nora laughed with them, and so after a minute Eric joined in. But he and
Nora looked at each other through their laughter and nodded
understanding.

When Ivra saw him at last come out of the farm house door, she didn't
wait longer, but ran away into the wood. He overtook her a long way in,
walking rapidly.

"Did you have a good time with the witches?" he asked.

"Why didn't you come, too?" she said

"Oh, it was too cold. Nora's grandchildren are awfully good fun. We
played hide-and-go-seek, just as we played it at the Tree Man's party."

"Did they laugh at me?"

" . . . No, they laughed at me. They thought I was a funny boy."

"To have me for a playmate?"

Then Eric began to think that Ivra was not very happy. Perhaps she had
been lonely.

"You're always running off with the Snow Witches," he said. "But I won't
play with Nora's grandchildren any more unless they'll let you play too.
I won't, truly!"

Ivra laughed. And it was like spring coming into winter. "Yes, play with
them all you like! I love them, too. I've often watched them. The
littlest boy, the one with the funny curls, laughs at me and stares and
stares. But the other two . . . they just give me a glance and then forget
all about me. They don't think I'm real. But they are awfully jolly. You
play with them and when you tell me about it afterwards I'll pretend I
was there playing too."

Then the two clasped hands and went skipping home.




CHAPTER XIV

SPRING COMES


One morning when Ivra woke up she knew spring had come before her eyes
were open. But Eric had to go outdoors to make sure. He was sure enough
when he smelled the ground, a good earth smell. Snow still clung to the
garden in spots here and there, but the warm sun promised it would not
be for long. Something in the sky, something in the air, a smell of
earth, and a stirring in his own heart told him it was true. Spring had
come!

Ivra had felt and known it before her eyes were open, and now that they
were open, those eyes of hers looked like two blue spring flowers just
awake. She hopped about in the garden poking and prodding the earth with
a stick, looking for her violets, her anemones, her star flowers. Not a
green leaf was pushing through yet, but oh, how soon there would be!

Suddenly she stopped and stood still looking away into the forest. Then
she ran to Eric on the door stone. She cried, "Mother will come now.
Don't you feel it? She will come with the spring!"

Eric did feel it. For there was magic in the day. The magic came to him
in the air, in the smell of the earth, in the new warm wind and said,
"Everything is yours that you want. Joy is coming." And Mother Helma was
what he wanted. So he felt sure she was on the way.

"She must have found the key,--or do you suppose she climbed the gray
wall?" wondered Ivra.

"Shall we go to meet her?" asked Eric.

"No, no. We must get the house clean and ready for her. We must hurry."

And then such a house-cleaning was begun as you or I have never seen.
The Forest Children had been up at dawn to greet the spring, and now
they came running to tell Ivra and Eric about it. When they heard that
Helma was at last coming back and the house was to be cleaned they
wanted to help. First it was decided to wash the floor. Pail after pail
of water from the fountain they splashed on it. Streamlets of water
flowed into the fireplace and out over the door stone. Out and in ran
the Forest Children trying to help, and with every step making foot
prints on the wet floor, muddy little foot prints, dozens of them and
finally hundreds of them.

Then the windows were washed. And because the Forest Children could not
run on those they were made bright and clear. But soon the Forest
Children pressed their faces against the panes to watch for Helma, and
as the minutes passed breath-clouds formed there, spreading and
deepening until the glass sparkled no more. But no one noticed. No one
cared. For now they were shining up the dishes, polishing them with
cloths, and setting them in neat rows in the cupboard.

Then Wild Star appeared, his hands full of spring flowers that he had
found deep in the forest in the sunniest and most protected place, the
very first spring flowers. "Helma must have gotten past that wall, now
it's spring," he said; "and here are some flowers to greet her. See, I
left the roots on, the way she likes them. Let's plant them by the door
stone."

They dug up the earth with their hands, Forest Children's hands, Wild
Star's hands, Eric's and Ivra's,--and planted the flowers all about the
door stone. Then Wild Star flew away a little languidly.

Ivra looked after him. "He'll soon find the deepest, darkest, coolest
place," she said, "make himself a nest of smooth leaves and dream away
the summer. Fall and winter are his flying times. We shall see him at no
more parties for a while."

"And the Snow Witches? What will become of them?" asked Eric.

"They will get into hollows of old trees and under rocks, draw in their
skirts and their hair, curl up and sleep."

"Good news!" thought Eric. But he did not say it for he knew Ivra liked
the Snow Witches almost best of all to play with and would miss them.

Now the Tree Girl came through the gap in the hedge. She was wearing a
green frock, green sandals, and pussy willow buds made a wreath in her
hair.

"Spring, spring!" she cried as she came up the path. "We heard the sap
running in our tree all night. Father has gone on a spring wandering,
and I shall stay within tree no longer for a while."

"We know, we know!" crowed Ivra. "_I_ knew before my eyes were open this
morning. Eric had to smell the ground first. Imagine! We have been
cleaning house. Mother will surely come now. Don't _you_ feel it?"

The Tree Girl lifted her face up in the new warm wind. Her soft hair
floated feather-like. "Yes, I feel it. She is on the way. Spring brings
everything."

A bird flashed from the trees. It lighted on the hedge for a second and
was away again. But Eric had had time to recognize the beautiful bird he
had seen caged in the Witch's fir.

"The caged bird!" he cried to Ivra. "It is free! It is flying away."

The Bird Fairies were flying away, too. They were going to meet the
birds corning up from the south and teach them their songs as they flew.
They came to say good-by to the children.

"Look for us next winter," they called back, as they fluttered off in a
silvery cloud.

And finally, at high noon, just as Ivra had known she would since early
morning, Helma came,--running through the forest, jumping the hedge, and
gathering Ivra and Eric into her arms.

They three knelt on the ground by the spring flowers embracing each
other for a long, long minute.

"Did you find the key to that gate?" Eric asked when his breath came
back, "Or did they let you come at last."

"I didn't have to find the key, and they didn't let me come. They would
never have done that. But the minute I had on a light spring frock I
found I could climb the wall easily enough, and so I came running all
the way. And now they shall never get me back behind doors again. I am
free! I am as free as you, my children!"

She held them off and looked into their eyes.

She was dressed in a brown silk gown, all torn and stained from her
wall-climbing and rush through the bushes. Her feet were bare, for she
had kicked off her funny high-heeled city boots the minute she had
reached the forest. Her hair had grown to her shoulders and looked more
like flower petals than ever. But her face was not brown and serene, as
Eric had first seen it. It was pale and wild.

"They don't believe in you, children," she said. "They don't believe in
me, not the me that I am. And from morning to night they made me a
slave. They made me wear such ugly, hurting things, and then they made
me dance! Every night we danced in hot rooms and ate strange bad-tasting
food. They called dancing like that a _party_. But I could only remember
our forest parties, and our dancing here under the cool moon.

"The only glimpse of the forest I had was your Snow Witches, Ivra.
Sometimes I saw them from my bedroom window, 'way out in the fields,
whirling and scudding in mad games. And then at last one morning some
Wind Creatures flew by, above the garden wall! But when I called Wild
Star back and tried to ask him about you, children, as he perched on the
wall, they came rushing into the garden and dragged me away. They said
it was time for luncheon, and I must change my frock. But let us forget.
I am here! It is spring!"

She jumped up and stood just as the Tree Girl had stood earlier that
morning, her face lifted in the wind. Slowly that face grew calm and
warm color flooded it.

"How nicely cleaned the house is!" she exclaimed when at last they went
in. For she did not see the tracks on the floor nor the clouded windows.
All she saw was that the children had worked there to make it fit for
her home-coming.

Ivra was proud and glad that she noticed. "I have made you a spring
frock too," she said, bringing it out. "And Eric has made you some
sandals. He makes fine sandals now!"

The frock was a brown smock with a narrow green belt.

The sandals were well made, and very soft and light.

Helma stripped off the tattered silk frock, the funny thing with its
long sleeves and stiff lace collar, and hid it away out of sight. On
went the new smock over her head in a twinkling. She stepped into the
sandals. And there was their mother, the Helma Eric had first seen.

"The garden now, we must see about that," she said in her old quiet way.
Then they went out into the garden, and Helma began to plan just where
there should plant seeds and just what must be done. The children clung
to her hands, looking up into her face, and would not let her take a
step away from them. When she stood still they leaned against her, one
against either side, and wound their arms about her.

In mid-afternoon, Spring came--not the spring of the year, but Spring
himself, the person the season is named for. He was a tall young man,
with a radiant face, and fair curls lifting in a cloud from his head.
Where he walked the earth sprang up in green grass after his bare feet,
and flowers followed him like a procession. Helma ran to him, swifter
than the children, and he kissed her lips. He lifted Ivra nigh on his
shoulder for one minute where she thought she looked away over the
treetops hundreds of miles to the blue ocean. But it may have been only
his eyes, which were very blue, that shee was looking into.

With him came two Earth Giants. They were huge brown fellows with
rolling muscles and kind, sleepy eyes. They crouched down at the opening
in the hedge and waited for Spring to go on with them.

"Shall we plant the garden, Helma?" asked Spring.

"Yes, yes," cried the children, and Helma said, "Yes, yes," as eagerly
as they.

So the Earth Giants came in and plowed it all up with their
hands,--hands twenty times as large as an Earth Man's! When they were
done, the garden was a rich golden color, and right for planting. Then
Helma pointed out to Spring where she wanted the seeds to be, violets
here, roses there, lilies there, pansies there and daisies there. Spring
gave some seeds to the children and sowed some himself. Helma sat on the
door stone and joyously directed the work.

By twilight the garden was done, and Spring went away with his Earth
Giants.

As he went out through the forest, flowers and green grass followed
him--and the next morning even the dullest Earth Person would know that
Spring had come.

As for Helma and Ivra and Eric, the house would not hold their joy, and
so they dragged out their beds and slept that night in the new-plowed,
sweet-smelling garden.




CHAPTER XV

SPRING WANDERING


"There goes another," said Helma as she stood in the door the very next
morning after her return. "The littlest Forest Child that was, and all
by himself. He seems rather small to go spring-wandering alone."

"He likes to go alone," Ivra answered. She was setting the table for
breakfast, and Eric was helping her. "'Most always he's playing or
wandering off by himself somewhere."

Helma stood watching the little fellow until he had vanished amid the
delicate green of the forest morning. Then she tossed back her hair with
a shake of her head and cried gayly, "Let's go wandering ourselves,
pets. It's good to be home, but we have all our lives for that now.
Let's adventure!"

The children were overjoyed. They did not want to wait for breakfast.
But Helma thought they had better, for no one knew where, when or how
their next meal would be. Of course, though, it was hard to eat. You
know yourself how you feel about food when you are going on an
adventure. However the bowls of cereal were swallowed somehow. Then the
stoutest sandals were strapped on, and the three were ready to set out.

First they went to Nora's farm and before they had waited many minutes
in the shadow of the trees on the edge of the field Nora came from the
door carrying their jug of milk. They ran to meet her and tell her not
to leave any more milk until they should come back. How glad the old
woman was to see Helma. "I thought spring would bring you," she said.
"Spring frees everything."

Then Helma, Ivra and Eric were off for their spring wandering. It seemed
as though every one else was wandering, too, for they could hardly walk
a mile without meeting some friend or stranger Forest Person. All gave
them greeting, whether stranger or friend, and all looked very glad that
Helma was in the forest again, for good news travels fast there, and
even the strangers knew of her home-coming.

In a secret wooded valley, walking softly to hear the birds and the
thousand little other songs of earth, they suddenly came upon a strange
and thrilling sight. A party of little girls and boys all in bright
colored frocks, purple, orange, green, blue, yellow, were putting the
finishing touches on an air-boat they were making. It was built of
delicate leaved branches and decorated with wild flowers. A great anchor
of dog-tooth violets hung over the sides and kept it on the ground.

When they saw Helma and the children coming so silently toward them they
jumped into the boat and crowded there looking like a bunch of larger
spring flowers. Then they drew in the anchor rapidly. But the little
girl sitting high in the back, the one in the torn yellow dress and with
blowing cloud-dark hair, cried, "Oh, no fear, it's Ivra and her mother
and the clear-eyed Earth Child. Want to come, Ivra? We're off spring
wandering among the white clouds."

Ivra shook her head and called, "Not unless three of us can come."

"Too full for that," called down the yellow-frocked one, for now the
boat had lifted softly almost to the tree tops. "Your Earth Child would
weigh us down. So hail and farewell. Good wandering!"

So the three on the ground stood looking up and waving and calling back,
"Good wandering!" until the green boat had drifted away and away and was
lost in the spring sky. But for a long time after, there floated down to
them in the valley far laughter and glad cries.

The spring nights were cold, and so at twilight they made themselves a
shelter of boughs. They slept as soon as it was night and woke and were
off at the break of dawn. Helma carried sweet chocolate in her pockets,
and forest friends and strangers offered them from their store all along
the way. Sometimes when they were tired or warm with walking they would
climb into the top of some tall tree, and there swinging among the cool
new leaves, Helma began telling them her World Stories again, while the
children looked off over the trembling forest roof and watched for
homing birds.

But when the hemlock and fir trees began to crowd out the maples and
oaks, Helma said quietly one day, "We are nearing the sea." "The sea,"
cried Eric almost wild with sudden delight. "Shall we see it? Shall we
swim in it? Oh, I have never seen it!"

"Oh, I saw it from Spring's shoulder," Ivra cried--she really thought
she had--"But mother, mother, what a wonderful surprise you had for us!"

They began to run in their eagerness. But Helma held them back. "It's a
day's journey yet," she said. And so they walked as patiently as they
could down a long, long slope through dark firs and hemlocks.

It was noon of the following day when they finally came to the sea. They
had struggled through a thick undergrowth of thorned bushes where the
great arms of the firs shut out everything ahead. Then suddenly they
were out of it, in the open, on the shore with the waves almost lapping
their toes. It was high tide. The blue sea stretched away to the blue
sky.

Eric's legs gave way under him, and he knelt on the white sand, just
looking and looking at the bigness of it, the splendor of it, the color
of it, and listening to the music of it. Ivra ran right out into the
foam brought in by the breakers, up to her waist, where she splashed the
water with her palms until her hair and face were drenched with salt
spray. Helma stood looking away to foreign countries which she could
almost see.

But they were not left long to themselves. The heads of a little girl
and boy and a young woman appeared over the crest of a great wave, and
the three were swept up to the shore. They grabbed Ivra and drew her
along with them as they passed, laughing musically. Ivra did not like it
at first, and sprang away from them the minute she could shake herself
free. But when she saw their merry faces and heard them laugh, she
returned shyly.

The children were about Eric's and Ivra's ages, and the young woman was
their mother. The children's names were Nan and Dan, and the woman's
name was Sally. But though they had Earth names they were of the
fairy-kind,--called in the Forest "Blue Water People."

Just peer into a clear pool or stream, almost any bright day, and you
will be pretty sure to see one of them looking up at you. They are the
sauciest and most mischievous of all fairies. Only stare at them a
little, and they will mock you to your face with smiles and pouts, and
will not go away as long as you stay. For they have no fear of you or
any Earth People. They follow their streams right into towns and cities,
under bridges and over dams. You are as likely to find one in your city
park as in the Forest.

Helma spoke to Sally, while the children eyed each other curiously. She
said, "How happy you Blue Water People must be now Spring has freed you
at last!"

Sally dropped down on the beach, her dark hair flung like a shadow on
the sand. Her laughing face looked straight up into the sky. She
stretched her arms above her head.

"He came just in time. Another day--and we would have had to break
through the ice ourselves. Truly. We've never had such a long winter.
Why, a _month_ ago we began to look for Spring. We lay with our faces
pressed against the cold ice for hours at a time, watching. We could
just see light through, and shadows now and then."

"And then I saw him first," cried Dan, who was listening to his mother.

"No, I!" cried Nan.

"No, no," Sallv laughed. "I heard him, singing, a long way off. And I
called you children away from your game of shells. When his foot touched
the ice we danced in circles of joy, and tapped messages through to him
with our fingers. The ice vanished under his feet, and our stream rushed
hither away to the sea. We came with it, and waved him hail and farewell
as we poured down. Who can stop at home in spring-time? And we had been
ice-bound so long!"

"And now we're here," boasted Dan, "I'm going to swim across the sea
to-morrow,--or the next day!"

"You're too little for that. Calm water is best, or little rushing
streams," warned Sally.

"What is it like across the sea?" asked Eric. "Another world?"

"I'll tell you about it in the next story," promised Helma. "And then
when I have told you, Eric, you may want to go across yourself and see
the wonders."

Eric drew a deep breath. "Yes, you and Ivra and I. In a boat." He
pointed to a white sail far out stuck up like a feather slantwise in the
water.

Ivra clapped her hands.

But Helma shook her head. "When you go, it must be alone, Ivra and I
belong to the Forest."

"Why, then I don't want to go, ever." Eric shook the thought from him
like water.

"Well, let's swim across now," Dan shouted, and ran into the waves,
falling flat as soon as he was deep enough and swimming fast away. The
other children followed him, ready for a frolic. You or I would have
found that water very cold, but these were hardy children; and one of
them all winter had made comrades of the Snow Witches, remember.

They waded out to the surf and plunged through it, head first. They took
hands and floated in a circle beyond, rising and falling in the even
motion of the rollers. Nan was very mischievous, and soon succeeded in
pushing Eric out, under where the waves broke. When he looked up
suddenly and saw the great watery roof hanging over him, he was
terrified but he did not scream. People who comraded with Ivra could not
do that. He shut his eyes tight, and then thundering down came the
water-roof, and a second after, up bobbed Eric like a cork, choking and
sputtering. They were laughing at him, even Ivra. The minute the salt
water was out of his eyes he laughed, too, and tried to push Nan into
the surf. But she was too quick for him, and slipped away, farther out
to sea.

Then began a game of water tag. Eric, because he was not such a good
swimmer as the others, was It most of the time. But Ivra had to take a
few turns as well. It was impossible to catch the other two. They moved
in the water as reflected light moves along a wall, not really swimming
at all, but flashing from spot to spot.

Helma and Sally lay on the sand in the spring sunshine and talked about
their children.

"Nan and Dan tear their clothes so," sighed Sally, "I could spend all my
time mending."

"I must make little Eric some new clothes," said Helma. "I hope I have
cloth enough at home."

"Nan is naughty, but she is a darling," laughed Sally as Eric was pushed
under the surf.

Helma waited to see that he came up smiling and then said, "Ivra and
Eric never quarrel. They play together from morn till night like two
squirrels."

 . . . They all had lunch together on the shore. The Blue Water Children
instead of eating smelled some spring flowers which Sally had found.
That is the way they always take their nourishment. Helma turned some
little cakes of chocolate out of her pockets, and though at first it
seemed like a small luncheon, when it was all eaten they felt satisfied.

All the afternoon the children played up and down the beach. They found
a smooth round pink sea-shell which they used for a ball. Eric was the
best at throwing. It made him happy and proud to excel in something at
last. He taught them how to play base ball, which he had once watched
Mrs. Freg's boys playing on Sundays in the back yard. They used a piece
of drift wood for a bat, and when the shell got accidentally batted into
the sea the Blue Water Children fielded it like fishes.

When they were tired of ball, the Blue Water Children drew lines on the
sand for "hop scotch,"--a game they had sometimes watched city children
playing in a park,--and taught Ivra and Eric about that.

Then they built a castle of sand, and walled it in with sea shells.
Helma showed them how to make the moat and the bridge, and Sally and she
took turns and made up a story about the castle and told it to them.

Towards evening some Earth People came by, near to the shore, in a
little steam launch. There were men and women and several children in
it. They crowded into the side of the boat towards the shore to stare
curiously at Helma and Eric. They could not see the others, of course.
Helma with her free, bright hair and bare feet looked very strange to
them. And they could not understand what Eric was doing with his arms
held straight out at each side. He was between Dan and Nan, holding
their hands, and standing to watch. But the Earth People looked right
through the Blue Water Children, or thought they were shadows perhaps.

One of the men put his hands to his mouth like a megaphone and called to
Helma, asking her if she did not want to be picked up. They thought her
being there in that wild place with a little boy, alone, and barefooted,
very singular. They thought she might have been shipwrecked. But Helma
shook her head, and so they had to take their wonder away with them. The
boat swept by.

Ivra ran out into the waves waist deep to watch the strange thing. She
had never seen a steam launch before, or anything like it. A baby, held
in his nurse's arms, caught sight of her and waved tiny dimpled hands,
calling and cooing. She saw his sparkling eyes, his light fuzzy hair,
his little white dress and socks. She ran farther into the water, waving
back to him and throwing him dozens of kisses. But no one else in the
boat saw her, and after a minute the baby's attention turned to a sea
gull flying overhead.

Ivra returned to shore, her face shining. There had been no doubt of
it--the baby had seen her at once, and had had no doubts. He had laughed
and reached his hands to her. The little Fairy Child almost hugged
herself with delight. . . .

They built themselves shelters of drift wood when night fell. Eric's was
just large enough for him to crawl into and lie still. One whole side of
it was open to the sea. Soft fir boughs made his bed, and Helma had left
a kiss with him. But he did not sleep for a long while. He lay on his
side looking out over the star-sprinkled water and up at the
star-flowering sky. And he could not have told how or from where the
command had come, but he knew as he looked that he must cross that sea
and go into the new world beyond it and see all things for himself.
World Stories were good. But they were not enough.

How he was to go, or how live when he got there--he did not once think
of that. Just that he _was_ to go filled his whole mind. He forgot that
he had said he would not go without Helma and Ivra. He did not think of
them at all. He just lay still listening to the sea's command to go
beyond and beyond.




CHAPTER XVI

OVER THE TREE TOPS


He was waked by Ivra's joyous cries just at dawn, and rolled out of his
shelter, rubbing his eyes and stretching his arms and legs. But as soon
as his eyes were well open he jumped up and uttered a cry of joy
himself. For hanging just above the water on the edge of the sea was a
great blue sea-shell air-boat with blue sails; and the Tree Mother stood
in it, talking to Helma and Ivra who had run down to the water's edge.

The boat and the sails were blue. Tree Mother's gown was blue. The sea
and the sky were blue. Tiny white caps feathered the water. Tiny white
clouds feathered the sky. And Tree Mother's hair was whiter and more
feathery than either. Her eyes were dark like the Tree Man's, only
keener and softer, both. And in spite of her being a grandmother her
face was brown and golden like a young out-of-door girl's, and she was
slim and quick and more than beautiful. Eric stood beside Ivra, his face
lifted up to the Tree Mother's, aglow and quivering.

"She is going to take us home," Ivra said softly.

Then Tree Mother turned the boat, and it drifted in and down on the
sand. The children and Helma climbed in. The Tree Mother said very
little on the long ride, but her presence was enough. The three were
almost trembling for joy, for the Tree Mother's companionship is rare,
and one of the splendidest things that can happen to a Forest Person.

The minute they were in the boat, it shot up and away towards home.

"Where are the Blue Water Children?" Eric cried, suddenly remembering
their playmates of yesterday.

"Have you been playing with Blue Water Children?" asked Tree Mother.
"They are gypsy-folk and you never know where you will find them next.
They are probably miles away by now."

"Faster, faster, Tree Mother," begged Ivra, who was hanging over the
side of the boat and losing herself in joy with the motion and height.

"Faster?" said the Tree Mother. "Then take care! Hold on!"

The boat shot forward with a sudden rush. The spring air changed from
cool feathers to a sharp wing beating their faces. Eric and Ivra slipped
to the floor and lay on their backs. They dared not sit up for fear of
being swept overboard. They could see nothing but the sky from where
they lay, but they loved the speed, and clapped their hands, and Ivra
cried, "Faster, faster!"

The Tree Mother laughed. "These are brave children," she thought. "Shut
your eyes then," she said, "and don't try too hard to breathe."

They swept on more swiftly than a wild-goose, so swiftly that soon the
children could neither hear, speak nor see. And then at last they were
traveling so fast that it felt as though the boat were standing
perfectly still in a cold dark place.

Gradually light began to leak through their shut eyelids, the wing of
the wind beat away from them, and the boat rocked slower and slower in
warm, spring-scented air. But in that brief time, they had traveled
many, many miles.

Now when the children leaned over the side, they saw that they were
sailing slowly over their own Forest. The tree tops were like a restless
green sea just a little beneath them. They flew low enough to hear bird
calls and the voices of the streams.

It was then they suddenly noticed that the littlest of the Forest
Children was there curled up fast asleep at Tree Mother's feet. Ivra
cried to him in surprise, and he woke slowly, stretching his little
brown legs, shaking his curly head, and lifting a sleepy face. He was
puzzled at seeing others beside Tree Mother in the boat. He had been
riding and awake with her all night up near the stars, and had dropped
to sleep as the stars faded.

She bent now and took his hand. "I picked these wanderers up at dawn,"
she said, "and now we are all going back together. We are well on the
way."

They had left the forest roof and were sailing over open country,--a
short cut, Tree Mother explained.

"Oh, look," cried Ivra excitedly, almost tumbling over the edge in her
endeavor to see better, "isn't that the gray wall off there?"

Yes, it was the gray wall, the gray wall that had prisoned their mother
all winter. The boat went slower and slower as they neared it and then
almost hung still over the garden. The garden was full of people, having
some kind of a party, for many little tables were set there with silver
and glass that shone brilliantly in the sun. Servants were hurrying back
and forth carrying trays and their gilt buttons sparkled almost as much
as the silver.

But how strange were the people! Eric and Ivra and the littlest Forest
Child laughed aloud. They were standing about so straight and stiff,
holding their cups and saucers, and their voices rising up to the
air-boat in confusion sounded like a hundred parrots.

"Why don't they sit down on the grass to eat?" wondered the littlest
Forest Child. "And why don't they wash their feet in the fountain? They
look so very hot and walk as though it hurt!"

"Sitting on the grass and washing their feet in the fountain is against
the law there," Helma said.

But neither Ivra nor the littlest Forest Child knew what "against the
law" meant. Eric knew, however, for he had lived nine years, remember,
where most everything a little boy wanted _was_ against the law.

"But why do they stay?" Eric asked.

Helma looked a little grave. "Why did you stay, dear, for nine long
years?"

He thought a minute. "I hadn't seen the magic beckoning," he answered
then.

"Neither have they," she said, "and perhaps never will, for their eyes
are getting dimmer all the time."

"But how can they _help_ seeing it?" cried the littlest Forest Child.
"See, all around the garden!"

It was true. All around the garden the tall trees stood and beckoned
with their high fingers, beckoned away and away with promise of magic
beyond magic. But the people in the garden never lifted their eyes to
see it. They were looking intently into their tea cups as though it
might be there magic was waiting.

"They are prisoners," said Tree Mother, "just as you were, Helma, with
this one difference. You were locked in, but they have locked themselves
in and carry their keys like precious things next their hearts."

Helma sighed and laughed at once. Then she leaned far out and tossed a
daffodil she was carrying down on the heads in the garden, shaking her
short, flower petal hair as she did it--she had cut it before starting
on the adventure--in a free, glad way.

No one looked up to see where the flower had dropped from. The people
down there were not interested in offerings from the heavens. So the
boat sailed on. Away and away over the canning factory they drifted,
where the little girl looked out from her window and up, and waved her
hands. "What are you waving at like that?" a man asked who was working
near. "Oh, just a white summer cloud," she said. For she knew very well
he did not want the truth. And I might as well tell you here that that
pale little girl was a prisoner who had not turned the lock herself, and
did not carry the key next her heart. Others had done that before she
was born. And she had seen the beckoning in spite of the lock and now
was only waiting a little while to answer it.

The children were glad to find the forest roof beneath them again. It
was noon when they sank down in the garden at their own white door
stone. Tree Mother left them there and flew away with the littlest
Forest Child, the one who liked to wander alone by himself.

Nora was in the house when they ran in. She had cleaned it with a
different cleaning from what it had had for Helma's first return. There
were no little foot prints on the floor now, and the window panes shone
like clear pools in sunlight. Three dishes of early strawberries and
three deep bowls of cream were standing on the table before the open
door. And then besides there was a big loaf of golden-brown bread.

"I thought you would be hungry," said Nora, pointing to the feast.

They were hungry indeed, for they had had nothing at all to eat since
yesterday's lunch of chocolate. They very soon finished the strawberries
and cream, and a jug of milk besides.

"You are a good neighbor, Nora," Helma said gratefully.

All Nora wanted in return for her labor and kindness was the story of
their adventure. She listened eagerly to every word. "I shall tell this
to my grandchildren," she said when the story was done, "and they will
think it just a fairy tale. They'll never believe it's fairy truth! Oh,
if they would only stop pretending to be so wise they themselves might
some time get the chance of a ride over the tree tops with Tree Mother.
But they never will. Come play with them again sometime, Eric. They
often talk about you."

"I'll come to-day and bring Ivra if they'll play with her, too!"

But Nora shook her head as she went away. "They don't believe in Ivra.
How could they play with her? Their grandmother can teach them nothing.
But they'll like the story of this adventure none the less for not
believing it."

When she was gone the three took the dishes into the house and washed
them. Then they went out and worked in the garden until dusk.




CHAPTER XVII

THE JUNE MOON


Now every day Eric was becoming acquainted with strange Forest People:
those who had hidden away from winter in trees, and those who were
wandering up from the south along with the birds, and Blue Water People,
of course, all along the Forest streams. The Forest teemed with new
playmates for him and Ivra.

Hide-and-go-seek was still the favorite game. And now it was more fun to
be "It" than to be hiding almost, for one was likely to come upon
strangers peeping out of tree hollows, swimming under water, or swinging
in the tree tops, any minute. When the person who was "It" came across
one of these strangers he would simply say, "I spy, and you're It." Then
he would draw the stranger away to the goal, where he usually joined the
game and was as much at home as though he had been playing in it from
the very first.

The day that Eric found Wild Thyme so was the best of all,--or rather
she was the best of all. And that was strange, for when he first spied
her he did not like her at all. Her dress was a purple slip just to her
knees, with a big rent in the skirt. Her hair was short and bushy and
dark. And her face was soberer than most Forest People's faces. She was
sitting out at the edge of the Forest on a flat rock, her chin in her
hands, and she did not look eager to make friends with any one.

But he cried, "I spy! You're It!" just the same. She did not lift her
eyes. She only said, "You must catch me first. I am Wild Thyme, and that
will be hard!"

Eric laughed, for she was not a yard away from him. And he sprang
forward as he laughed. But she was quicker than he. She had been at
perfect rest on the rock, her chin in her hands, and not looking at him,
but the instant he jumped she was off like a flash, a purple streak
across the field.

But Eric did not let his surprise delay him. He ran after her just as
fast as he could, and that was very, very fast, for running with Ivra
had taught him to run faster than most Earth Children ever dream of
running. Soon, Wild Thyme slowed down a little, and faced him, running
backward, her bushy hair raised from her head in the wind of her
running, her little brown face and great purple eyes gleaming
mischievously. Eric sprang for her. She dodged. He sprang again. She
dodged again. He cried out in vexation and sprang again, straight and
sure. He caught her by her bushy hair as she turned to fly.

And a strange thing happened to him in that second, the second he caught
her hair. Instead of Wild Thyme and the sunny field, he was looking at
the sea. He was standing on the shore, looking away and away, almost to
foreign lands. Now ever since that spring night on the shore he had been
thinking of the sea and longing with all his might to cross it and see
foreign lands for himself. Only that had seemed impossible, and
something he must surely wait till he was grown up to do. But now, in a
flash, as his fingers closed on Wild Thyme's hair, he knew that he could
indeed do that, and anything else he really set his heart on.

No girl, even a fairy, likes to have her hair pulled. So Wild Thyme was
angry. She pinched Eric's arm with all her strength. Then _he_ was
angry. And so they stood holding each other, he her by the hair, and she
him by the arm, staring hotly into each other's faces. But slowly they
relaxed, and becoming their own natural selves again, broke into
laughter.

"You'll play with us, won't you?" Eric asked.

"Of course," she said, "and I _am_ It!" And away they ran to find the
others, Ivra, the Tree Girl, the Forest Children, and Dan and Nan. When
those saw who it was Eric had captured they ran to meet her, shouting
gayly, "Wild Thyme! Goody! Goody! Hello, Wild Thyme!" They seemed to
have known her always. She and Ivra threw their arms about each other's
shoulders and danced away to the goal.

Wild Thyme was a wonderful playfellow. She was so wild, so free, so
strong, so mischievous. And when the game was ended she invited them to
a dance that very night. "It's to be around the Tree Man's Tree," she
said. "And all come--come when the moon rises."


 . . . Perhaps Eric's good times in the Forest reached their very height
that June night of the dance. He had never been to a dance before, and
just at first he did not think there would be much fun in it. But Ivra
wanted him to go, and offered to show him about the dances. So they ran
away from the others to the edge of the field where Eric had discovered
Wild Thyme, and there on the even, grassy ground Ivra showed him how to
dance. It was very easy,--not at all like the dances Earth Children
dance. It was much more fun, and much livelier. The dances were just
whirling and skipping and jumping, each dancer by himself, but all in a
circle. Eric liked it as well as though it had been a new game.

Late that afternoon Helma and Ivra and Eric gathered ferns and flowers
to deck themselves for the evening. They put them on over the stream,
which was the only mirror in the Forest.

Helma made a girdle of brakes for herself, and a dandelion wreath for
her hair. She wove a dear little cap of star flowers for Ivra, and a
chain of them for her neck. Eric crowned himself with bloodroot and
contrived grass sandals for his feet. But the sandals, of course, wore
through before the end of the first dance and fell off.

They had a splendid supper of raspberries and cream, which they sat on
the door stone to eat, and then told stories to each other, while they
waited for the moon to rise. It came early, big and round and yellow,
shining through the trees, flooding the aisles of the Forest with silver
light until they looked like still streams, and the trees like masts of
great ships standing in them.

Then the three hurried away to the Tree Man's. They ran hand in hand
through the forest aisles, their faces as bright to each other as in
daylight. But before they even came in sight of the tree they heard
music.

"Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmm, thrummmmmmmmmmmm." Very soft, very
insistent, very simple and strangely thrilling. When they came to the
tree, there were the Forest Children, who had come early, whirling
around in a circle, and the Tree Girl in the center of the circle making
music with a tiny instrument she held in one hand and touched with the
fingers of the other.

Soon Forest People began arriving from every direction. There were the
Blue Water Children, bright pebbles around their necks, and white sea
shells in their blue hair. The Forest Children were crowned with
maidenhair fern. The Tree Girl was the most beautiful of all in her
silver cobweb frock and her cloudy hair. The Tree Man stood still in the
shadow, but his long white beard gleamed out, and his deep eyes. Wild
Thyme wore a rope of the flower that is named for her around her neck,
but there was a new rent in her purple frock and her legs were scratched
as though she had remembered her dance only the last minute and come
plunging the shortest way through bushes, which was true.

Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmmm.

Every one except the Tree Man was dancing, bewitched in the moonlight,
all over the grassy space around the great tree. The grass was cool and
refreshing under Eric's bare feet, and he often dug his bare toes into
the soft earth at its roots as he leapt or ran just to make sure he was
on earth at all. For he felt as though he were swimming in moonlight, or
at least treading it.

Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmmm.

When the Tree Girl's music stopped between dances, then it would go on
in Eric's head. It was just the sound of the night after all. Once Eric
noticed that the Beautiful Wicked Witch was dancing next to him in the
circle but he was not afraid of her there with the others, and in bright
moonlight. And she was plotting no ill. Her face was sparkling with
delight and she had utterly forgotten herself in the dance.

When the great moon hung just above them, and shadows were few and far
between, the Tree Mother came walking through the Forest, quieter and
more beautiful than the moon. Wild Thyme ran to her and laid her bushy
head against her breast. For Wild Thyme only of all the Forest People
loved her without awe. The Tree Mother put her hand on Wild Thyme's head
and stood to watch the dancing. Her robe gleamed like frost, and her
hair was a pool of light above her head.

Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmm.

Wild Thyme jumped back into the dance and the Tree Mother stood alone.
But although she stood as still as a moonbeam under the tree, she made
Eric think of dancing more than all the others put together. It was her
eyes. The thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmmm was in them, and the rest
of that night Eric felt as though the music-instrument the Tree Girl was
swinging was silent, and that all the music flowed from Tree Mother.

But Eric, after all, was only an Earth Child, and his legs got very
tired in spite of the music and the moonlight. So at last he slipped out
of the circle, and stumbling with weariness and sleepiness went to Tree
Mother. She picked him up in her arms, and the minute his head touched
her shoulder he was sound asleep, the music at last hushed in his head.

When he woke it was summer dawn. The birds were flitting above in the
tree-boughs and making high singing. He was alone, lying beneath a
silver birch, his head among the star flowers.

He knew that Helma and Ivra had not wanted to wake him, but had gone
home when the moon set, and were waiting breakfast for him there now. So
he jumped up and ran home through the dew.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE DEEPEST PLACE IN THE WOOD


It was on the hottest day of all the hot days of summer that Eric found
the deepest place in the Forest. He wandered into it while he was
looking for Wild Thyme. Ivra had been no good to him that day. She was
usually ready to play in any weather; but on this, the hottest day of
the year, she stayed indoors, where it was a little cooler, and lying on
the settle she drew paper dolls on birch bark, and afterwards cut them
out. Yes, even fairy children love paper dolls and Ivra loved them more
than most. Eric wanted her to go swimming in the stream, but he teased
her to in vain, for she was entranced with the dolls and would hardly
lift her eyes from them.

Helma was swinging in a vine swing she had made for herself high in a
tree above the garden. One of the Little People was perched on a leaf
just over her head, and they were chattering together like equals. Their
eager voices floated down to Eric standing disconsolate near the door
stone. But Helma usually knew when her children were in trouble, no
matter how tiny the trouble, and so before Eric had stood there long or
dug up more than a bushel of earth with his bare toes, she leaned over
the nest and called to him.

"Why don't you go and play with Wild Thyme? She doesn't mind the heat.
Every one else is staying quiet till sundown."

Wild Thyme was a happy thought, and Eric walked away in search of her.
But she was in the very last place he would have thought to look on such
a scorching day, and that is how he missed her. She was lying full
length on the hot burnt grass in the field at the Forest's edge, loving
the heat and sunshine, which covered her like a mantle. If Eric had seen
her it is probable he would not have known her or stopped to look twice.
He would have thought her just a little patch of the flower that is
named for her.

So he wandered on and on, looking high and low and all about for her,
and he went deeper and deeper into the Forest. The deeper he went the
cooler it became, for the forest roof kept out the sunshine. The light
grew dimmer and dimmer too. Eric had never been so far in before and
everything was strange to him.

He saw no Forest People except a little brown goblin who peered at him
from some underbrush and then scuttled away into the darkness of denser
brush. Eric had never seen a goblin before, but he had no fear of
goblins, and so this one did not bother him at all. He heard others
scuttling and squeaking, and one threw a chunk of gray moss at him. He
stopped and picked it up and threw it back with a laugh in the direction
it had come from.

"Come out and play, why don't you?" he called. "I know where there's a
fine swimming pool." But there was no answer to his invitation. Instead
there was sudden and utter silence. He was disappointed, for he did want
a playmate, and he had almost given up looking for Wild Thyme.

After walking for a long while he came at last to one of the windings of
the Forest stream, and gratefully stepped into the shallow, clear water,
dark with shadows. His feet were burning, and his head was hot. So he
drank a long drink of the cold, delicious water, ducked his head, and
finally washed his face. Then he waded on with no purpose in mind now
but just to keep his feet in the water.

It was so he came to the deepest place; where not even Ivra had ever
been. It was almost cool there, and more like twilight than early
afternoon. And right in the deepest place, in a nest of smooth leaves,
with his feet in the water, lay Wild Star. When Eric first caught sight
of him he thought he was asleep, for his wings were lying on the leaves
half folded and dropped, and his knees were higher than his head. But
when Eric went close enough to see his eyes he knew that he was very
wide awake, for they were wide open, watchful and intent,--and purple
like the early morning. Such wide-awake eyes were startling in such a
sleepy, still place. Eric expected him to spread his wings in a flash
and dart away. But the wings stayed half open, purple shadows on the
leaves, and Wild Star did not even raise his head. Only his eyes greeted
Eric.

But Eric knew without words that Wild Star was glad to see him. So he
stepped up out of the water and stretched himself on a mound of silvery
moss near by. With his chin resting in his palms and his elbows
supporting, he faced the Wind Creature, his clear blue eyes open to the
intent purple ones.

It was Wild Star who spoke first.

"I thought, little Eric, you would have crossed the sea before this, and
be out of the Forest. I expected to find you next fall on the other side
of the world."

Eric was amazed, for he had not said one word of his dream about that to
any one. "How did you know I wanted to go?" he cried.

"Oh, you are an Earth Child, after all, and I knew you would want to be
going on, as soon as you saw the sea."

"But _why_ do I want to go on?" asked Eric, his face clouding with the
puzzle of it. "I am so happy here, and Helma is my mother now. There
can't be another mother across the sea for me. And if there were I
wouldn't want her,--not after Helma! No, Helma is my only mother, and
Ivra is my comrade. And still I want to leave them,--and go on and away
over there. It is very funny."

"No," said Wild Star. "It isn't funny. You are a growing Earth Child,
not a fairy. It is your own kind calling you. It is the music of your
human life."

"I don't know what you mean," said Eric.

"It is like this: you know when you begin to sing a song, you go on and
on to the end without thinking about it at all. It is the theme that
carries you. Well, a human life is made like a song,--it carries itself
along. You do not stop to think why. It can't stop in the middle, on one
chord, for long. Yours now is resting, on a chord of happiness. But soon
it will go on again. You want it to. Life in the Forest, though, isn't
like that. Here it is music without any theme, like the music we dance
to. Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmm. But there is more than that to an
Earth Child's life. It runs on like this stream. The stream is happy
here in the Forest, too, but it goes on seeking the sea just the same."

There was a long stillness while Eric looked down into the green depths
of the water. At last he asked, "But how could I ever get across the
sea? And when I got there how could I get back?"

"Time enough to think about getting back when you are there," laughed
Wild Star. "But as to getting there, Helma is the one to tell you that.
She has been an Earth Child, too, you know. She felt just as you did,
that spring night on the shore. She has felt it many times. It is only
Ivra that keeps her in the Forest. Ivra docs not belong out in the world
of humans, and Helma will never leave her. But she will understand
your longing. All you have to do is tell her."

Eric clapped his hands, a habit he had caught from Ivra. "Oh, I shall
cross in a ship," he cried, "and see all the foreign lands. And when I
come back, think of the World Stories I shall have to tell Helma and
Ivra!"

He sprang up in his joy, and felt as though he had wings on his
shoulders like Wild Star, and had only to spread them out to go beating
around the world. For a second the Wind Creature and the Earth Child
looked very much alike. And indeed, the only difference was that Wild
Star had to wait for the wind, and Eric need wait for no wind or no
season. His wings were _inside of his head_, but they were as strong as
Wild Star's. And he had only to spread them and lift them to go anywhere
he wanted.

Now he wanted to get back to Helma and tell her all about it. Wild Star
pointed him the shortest way, and off he ran, jumping the stream and the
moss beds beyond, and disappearing into the underbrush.

"I'll look for you next time the other side of the world!" Wild Star
shouted after him.

It was twilight when he reached home. Helma and Ivra were sitting on the
door stone, hand in hand. They made room for Eric. But he did not
snuggle up. He stayed erect, his face lifted towards the first dim
stars, and told Helma all about his wanting to go away from them out
through the Forest and across the sea, and all that Wild Star had said
about music and Earth People's lives. And he told her, too, of the
vision of success he had had when he caught Wild Thyme that first day by
her bushy hair.

Helma listened quietly, and said nothing for many minutes after he was
through. But at last she spoke, putting a hushing hand on Eric's
dreamful head.

"I understand," she said. "I knew you would want to go on sometime. And
I have a friend across there who will help us. He has a school for boys
and I got to know him very well behind the gray stone wall. He asked me
about the Forest and you children. And he said that Eric sometime would
surely want to go back to humans, and when he did he would help him. He
understands boys. It is to him you had better go, Eric, and when you are
really ready I will tell you how, and start you on your way."

Eric sighed with contentment, and leaned his head against Helma's
shoulder.

But Ivra stayed at her mother's other side, as still and silent as a
shadow. Soon the fireflies began their nightly dance in the garden. But
Ivra did not go darting after them as usual to make their dance the
swifter. And Eric's head was too full of dreams and his eyes too full of
visions of the sea to notice them at all.




CHAPTER XIX

MORE MAGIC IN A MIST


Indian summer had come round again before Eric really made up his mind to
go. The flowers were asleep in the garden, and there was a steady,
gentle shower of yellow leaves down the Forest. That morning when he
woke the little house seemed suspended in a golden mist. As he stood in
the doorway he felt as though it might drift away up over the trees and
into space any minute. But after a little he knew it was not Helma's
little forest house that was to go swinging away into space and
adventure,--it was himself. And suddenly he wanted to go _then_,--to the
sea and over and beyond. He called the news in to Helma and Ivra, who
were still within doors. Helma came swiftly out to him.

"The trees are beckoning again, mother," he cried. "The way they did a
year ago when I first came here. Now it is just as Wild Star said. The
music is beginning to go on. There's magic out to-day. Oh, what made
Wild Star know so much?"

"Sit down," said Helma. She took his hand and drew him down beside her
on the door stone. Then she held it firmly while very slowly and
distinctly, but once only, she gave him directions about how to go,
where to go and what to do, so that he might follow the magic.

Eric sat and listened attentively, in spite of the high beating of his
heart, and the magic working in his head. As soon as she was done, he
wanted to go right away that minute. For even in his happiness he knew
that saying good-by to all his friends in the Forest would be too sad a
task. They did not say good-by when they went on long adventures, or
followed summer south. They simply disappeared one day, and those who
stayed behind forgot them until next season. So Eric would do as they.

Only last week Helma had made him a warm brown suit for the coming
winter. The new strong sandals on his feet he had made himself. His cap
was new, too, and Helma had stuck two new little brown feathers in it as
in the old one; so he still had a look of flying. There was really
nothing to delay his departure further. Helma called to Ivra, and she
came out slowly. There was no need to explain things to her, for she had
heard everything.

Helma lifted Eric's chin in her palms and looked long and earnestly at
the child she was letting go away from her all alone out into the queer
world of Earth People. She picked him up in her strong arms then, as
though he were a very little boy, and kissed him. She ran with him to
the opening in the hedge and set him down there, laughing.

"Run along now 'round the world," she said. "And when you come back
bring a hundred new World Stories with you!"

Eric laughed too, and promised and stood on tiptoes to kiss her again.
He stroked her short flower petal hair, and kissed her cool brown cheek
over and over. But he did not cling to her. And he did not say another
word, but ran to catch up with Ivra who was to walk with him until noon
and had gone on ahead.

The children did not scuffle through the banks of leaves, or jump and
run and burst into play as they were used to doing. They walked steadily
forward, saying very little, neither hurrying nor delaying their steps.
Once when Eric's sandal came untied Ivra knelt to fix it, for she was
still more skillful with knots than he.

But when the sun showed that it was noon, Ivra's steps grew slower and
slower, dragged and dragged, until at last she stood still in a billow
of leaves.

"I have to go back now," she said.

In a flash all the magic swept out of the day for Eric. He knew he could
never say good-by to Ivra, so he stayed silent, looking ahead into the
fluttering, golden forest. But even as he looked the trees began to
beckon with their high fingers, and 'way away, down long avenues of
trees he _almost_ glimpsed the sea.

Ivra threw her arms about his neck and kissed him. "Good-by, comrade,"
was all she said.

He kissed her cheeks. "I'll come back," he promised. But before he had
gone many steps he turned to see her again. She was standing in the
billow of leaves, a lonely-looking little girl, her face paler than it
had been even on that day of the wind-hunt. He wanted to run back to her
and tell her he would be her playmate always, and never leave the
Forest. But he wanted, too, to go on and across the sea and into foreign
lands. He stayed irresolute.

And then quite suddenly, standing just behind Ivra, he saw Tree Mother.
She was not looking at him at all, but at Ivra, and her eyes were kind
stars. When Ivra turned to go home she must walk right into Tree
Mother's arms and against her breast. So Eric was happy again, Ivra
could not be lonely with dear Tree Mother. Perhaps she would take her up
in her air-boat high above the falling leaves, where she could look down
on the magic. He waved, calling, "Remember me to the Snow Witches when
they come." That was not because he really wanted to be remembered to
them but because he knew that Ivra liked them best of all, and it
would please her.

She nodded and waved too, and threw him a kiss. Then a shower of
fluttering leaves came between the playmates.

When it was clear again Eric had run on out of sight, and was lost to
Ivra in the Forest. On and on and on through the showers of golden
leaves he went, magic at his elbow and around him, and beckoning ahead
of him. And after long walking and many thoughts, at last he did see the
sea, gleaming blue and white sparkles between the golden trees.


FIRST WONDER

[Illustration: THE GREAT PYRAMID]


Rachel was a very unhappy little girl as she sat in an omnibus with
Miss Moore, on her way to the British Museum. She didn’t want to go
to the British Museum. She didn’t want to be in London at all. She
longed desperately to be back in her country home with her father and
mother—now, alas! far away in Egypt.

Everything as Rachel said had happened so suddenly. Certainly her
mother had been ill some time, but it was all at once decided that the
only possible place to send her little daughter in a hurry, was to Aunt
Hester, in London.

Aunt Hester, who was her father’s eldest sister, and in the eyes
of Rachel, at least, awfully old, was quite kind, but also, as she
admitted, quite unused to children. The first thing she did therefore,
was to engage a governess to look after her niece for the seven weeks
she would have to remain with her.

Miss Moore, a rather uninteresting, middle-aged lady, had duly arrived
the previous evening, and at breakfast time Aunt Hester had suggested
the British Museum as a suitable place to which Rachel might be
conducted.

“She’s never been to London before, and, though I don’t want her to sit
too long over lessons, I think she should improve her mind while she
is here. The British Museum is an education in itself,” declared Aunt
Hester, and Miss Moore had primly agreed.

So it happened that at eleven o’clock on a bright spring morning, a
secretly unwilling little girl climbed the steps leading to the great
entrance of the great museum. The pigeons on the steps reminded her
of the dovecote at home, and the tears came suddenly to her eyes, as
almost without thinking she counted the number of birds on the top step.

“Seven,” she murmured half aloud.

“Seven what?” asked Miss Moore.

“Seven pigeons on this step. Aren’t they pretty?” Rachel lingered to
look at the burnished shining necks. She would much rather have stayed
outside with the pigeons, but Miss Moore hurried on to the swing doors,
and Rachel was obliged to follow her into the huge building.

“What do they keep here?” she asked listlessly, when Miss Moore had
given up her umbrella to a man behind a counter, just inside.

“All sorts of things,” returned her governess vaguely. “It’s a
_museum_, you know.”

Rachel was not very much the wiser but, as she walked with Miss Moore
from one great hall to another, she was confused and wearied by the
number of things of which she had glimpses. There were rows of statues,
cases full of strange objects, monuments in stone all covered with
carvings; curious pictures on the walls. Indeed, there _were_ “all
sorts of things” in the British Museum! But, as she knew nothing about
any of them, and Miss Moore volunteered very little information, she
was yawning with boredom by the time her governess remarked:

“Now, _these_ things come from Egypt.”

For the first time Rachel pricked up her ears. Mother and Dad were now
in Egypt, and as she glanced at the long stone things like tombs, at
drawings and models and a thousand other incomprehensible objects all
round her, she wished she knew something about them. Instead of saying
so, however, and almost without thinking, she murmured, “This is the
seventh room we’ve come to. I’ve counted them.”

“This is the famous _Rosetta_ Stone,” observed Miss Moore, reading an
inscription at the foot of a dull-looking broken block of marble in
front of them.

Rachel yawned for the seventh time with such vigour that her eyes
closed, and when she opened them a queer-looking little old man was
bending over the big block.

“What is the date of the month?” he asked so suddenly that she started
violently.

“Let me see. The seventh, I think. Yes—the seventh,” she stammered,
raising her eyes to his face.

He was so muffled up, that nearly all Rachel could see of him was a
pair of very large dark eyes, under a curious-looking hat. He wore a
long cloak reaching to his heels, and one end of the cloak was flung
over his left shoulder almost concealing his face.

Rachel scarcely knew why she thought him so old, except perhaps, that
his figure seemed to be much bent.

“Quite right. It’s the seventh,” he returned. “And what’s the name of
your house?”

Rachel looked round for Miss Moore, who strangely enough was still
reading the inscription on the stone, and seemed to be paying no
attention to the old man’s questions.

“It’s called ‘The Seven Gables,’” she answered.

“And where are you living now?”

“At number seven Cranborough Terrace.”

“And your name is _Rachel_. Do you read your Bible? How many years did
Jacob work for his wife?”

“He waited for her seven years. And her name was Rachel,” she
exclaimed, forgetting to wonder why Miss Moore didn’t interfere, or
join in a conversation which was becoming so interesting.

“The _seventh_ of the month, and the Seven Gables, and _seven_ years
for Rachel—and, why, there were _seven_ pigeons just outside as I came
in, and this is the seventh room we’ve come to. Because I counted them.
I don’t know why—but I did. What a lot of sevens.”

“Can you think of any other sevens in your life?” asked the little old
man, quietly.

“Why, yes!” she answered, excitedly. “There are seven of us. All grown
up except me. And I’m the seventh child, and the youngest!”

“Seven is a magic number, you know,” said her companion, gravely.

“Is it? Really and truly?” asked Rachel. “Oh, I do love hearing about
magic things! But I thought there weren’t any now?”

“On the contrary, the world is full of them. Take this, for instance.”
He pointed to the broken marble block. “That’s a magic stone.”

Rachel gazed at it reverently. “What does it do?” she asked almost in a
whisper.

“It’s a gate into the Past,” returned the old man in a dreamy voice.
“But come now,” he went on more briskly, “can we remember any more
sevens? You begin.”

“There are seven days in the week,” said Rachel, trying to think,
though she was longing to ask more about the magic stone.

“There’s the seven-branched candlestick in the Bible,” the old man went
on, promptly.

“And the seven ears of corn and the seven thin cows that Pharaoh dreamt
about,” returned Rachel, entering into the spirit of the game.

“The story of the Seven Sleepers.”

“The Seven Champions of Christendom,” added Rachel, who had just read
the book. “Oh, there are thousands of sevens. I can think of lots more
in a minute.”

“It’s my turn now,” was the old man’s answer. “The Seven Wonders of the
World.”

“I never heard of them. What are they?” Rachel demanded.

Again the old man pointed to the stone. “That gateway would lead you to
one of them,” he said, quietly, “if, as I’m beginning to think, you’re
one of the lucky children.”

[Illustration: THE ROSETTA STONE]

“Do lucky children have a lot to do with _seven_? Because if so,
I ought to be one, oughtn’t I? It’s funny I never thought about it
before, but there’s a seven in everything that has to do with me! And—”

“We’ll try,” interrupted the little old man. “Shut your eyes and bow
seven times in the direction of this stone. Never mind this lady”—for
Rachel had quite suddenly remembered the curious silence of her
governess. “She won’t miss you. You may do as I tell you without fear.”

Casting one hasty glance at Miss Moore, who had moved to a little
distance and was just consulting her watch, Rachel, full of excited
wonder, obeyed. Seven times she bent her head with fast-closed eyes,
and opened them only when her companion called softly “_Now._”

Even before she opened them, Rachel was conscious of a delicious warmth
like that of a hot midsummer day. A moment ago she had felt very chilly
standing before the marble block Miss Moore called the _Rosetta_ Stone,
in a big, gloomy hall of the British Museum. How could it so suddenly
have become warm?

In a second the question was answered, for she stood under a sky blue
as the deepest blue flower, and the glorious sun lighted a scene so
wonderful that Rachel gave a scream of astonishment.

“Where are we?” she gasped.

“In the mighty and mysterious land of Egypt,” answered her companion,
“as it appeared thousands of years before the birth of Christ.”

His tone was so solemn that Rachel turned quickly to look at him, and,
wonder of wonders, no old man was by her side! A dark-skinned youth
stood there, dressed in a curious but beautiful robe with strange
designs embroidered on its hem, and a no less strange head-dress, from
which gold coins fell in a fringe upon his forehead.

“Oh!” cried Rachel, when she could speak for amazement. “You were old
just now. I don’t understand. Who are you?” she added, in confusion.

The young man smiled, showing a row of beautiful white teeth. “My name
is Sheshà. I _am_ old,” he said. “Very, very old.” He pointed to a
great object at which, so far, in her astonishment, Rachel had scarcely
had time to glance. “I was born before _that_ was quite finished—six
thousand years ago.”

Rachel gasped again.

“But you look younger than my brother, and _he’s_ only twenty,” she
exclaimed.

“In returning to the land of my birth I return also to the age I was
when I lived in it.... But now, little maid of To-day, look around you,
for there stands, as it stood six thousand years ago, one of the Seven
Wonders of the World.”

Rachel obeyed and gazed upon a huge building with a broad base,
tapering almost to a point, whose walls were of smooth polished stones
of enormous size. Only a moment previously she had glanced carelessly
at pictures of buildings like this one, but now, as she saw it rising
before her in all its grandeur out of the yellow sand, and under a
canopy of blue sky, she almost held her breath.

“It is a pyramid, isn’t it?” she whispered. “I’ve seen pictures of
pyramids, but I don’t know anything about them.”

“It is the first great pyramid of Egypt,” answered the young man. “And,
little maid, you are highly favoured, for you see it as it looked
nearly six thousand years ago. It was already old when Joseph was
in Egypt, and Moses saw it when he lived in the palace of Pharaoh’s
daughter.”

Rachel gasped. “But what is it? What is it built for?” she asked.

“For the tomb of a king. That pyramid—” he pointed towards it—“was
built by the great King Cheops, and because you are one of the
fortunate children of the magic number seven, you see one of the Seven
Wonders of the World as it stood fresh from the workers’ hands.”

“Dad is in Egypt now. _He_ doesn’t see it like this then?”

Sheshà smiled. “Nay. He has already approached the Wonder in an
electric car—like all the other travellers of to-day, and instead of
these walls of granite which you behold, graven over with letters and
strange figures, he has seen great rough steps.”

“Steps?” echoed Rachel. “Why are there _steps_ up the side now?”

“Because beneath these smooth walls the pyramid is built of gigantic
blocks of stone, and now that their covering has been removed, the
blocks look like steps which can be, and _are_ climbed by people who
live in the world to-day.”

“But why was its beautiful shining case taken off?” Rachel asked,
looking with curiosity at the carving upon it.

“Because in the course of long years the people of other nations who
conquered Egypt and had no respect for my wondrous land, broke up the
‘beautiful shining case,’ to quote your own words, little maid, and
used it for building temples in which they worshipped gods strange and
new.”

Rachel glanced again at her companion. She was still so bewildered that
she scarcely knew which she should ask first of the hundred questions
crowding to her mind. And then everything around her was so strange and
beautiful! The yellow sand of the desert, the blue sky, the burning
sun, the long strip of fertile land bordering a great river.

“That must be the Nile,” she thought, remembering her geography. “The
Nile is in Egypt.”

Just as though he read her thoughts, Sheshà again broke silence.

“Do you wonder that we worshipped the river in those far-off days?” he
asked, dreamily.

“Did you? Why?” Rachel gazed at him curiously.

“It was, and is, the life-giver,” returned Sheshà. “But for that river,
there would never have been any food in this land. And therefore no
cities, no temples, no pyramids, no great schools of learning as there
were here in ancient days when Moses was ‘learnèd in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians.’”

“Yes, but how could the river make the corn grow, and give you food?”
asked Rachel. “I thought it was the _rain_ that made things grow.”

“In Egypt rain does not fall. But the river, this wondrous river of
ours, does the work of rain. Once every year it overflows its banks,
and the thirsty land is watered, and what would otherwise be all
desert, like the yellow sand you see that is not reached by the flood,
becomes green with waving corn, and shady palm trees, and beautiful
with fruit and flowers. Yes, no wonder we worshipped our river.”

Rachel would like to have asked him how the river was worshipped, but
Sheshà seemed rather to be talking to himself than to her, and there
was such a curious far-away look on his face that she felt shy of
questioning him. He stood gazing at the Pyramid as though he saw things
even more amazing than its mighty form.

“It must have taken a long time to build,” she ventured at last, rather
timidly.

Sheshà started.

“I was dreaming,” he said. “A long time to build? Verily. Would you
care to see by whom, and at what cost it was raised? I can show you. We
have but to travel a little further back into the Past for that. Shut
fast your eyes and bow seven times as before.”

[Illustration]

Rachel needed no second bidding, and in a few seconds, having obeyed
the instructions of her companion, she looked again upon a scene
strange and marvellous. The great Pyramid was there as before, but as
yet not quite finished. Its mighty walls were built, and were being
covered by the smooth case of granite, and round the great pile, like
ants swarming over an ant hill, were the builders—thousands upon
thousands of dark-skinned, almost naked, men, toiling like the slaves
they were. Here great blocks of marble and granite were being dragged
from barges on the river. There, hundreds of slaves were hoisting the
huge slabs into place on the as yet, unfinished walls, while multitudes
of others swarmed over and round the monument, cutting, hammering,
polishing, chiselling. A hum as of innumerable bees filled the air, and
indeed, Rachel was reminded of a hive, the inside of which her father
had once shown her, all quivering with the movement of the worker bees
as they toiled to make their cells.

She gave a little scream of astonishment at the sight of the thronging
multitudes, and presently heard the grave voice of Sheshà speaking.

“Behold, little maiden, in what manner this Wonder of the World was
fashioned. Out of the toil and labour of flesh and blood, in the days
when the Pharaohs ruled in this land, and cared naught for the lives of
their humbler subjects. Of these, as you see, they made slaves who did
the work that in the world of to-day is performed by machines, by steam
power, by electricity, by all the new inventions of modern times.”

“Do the people who come to Egypt now know all this? I mean people who
don’t come in a _magic_ way like me. Are there history books all about
Egypt as it was long ago?”

Sheshà pointed to the Pyramids. “That and many other monuments are the
history books—the great tombs, and all the palaces and temples and
columns still standing after thousands of years. On them are written
the story of the land. Behold, it is being written before your eyes,
since by what you call _magic_ you are watching the work of men who
laboured four thousand years before Christ.”

“But how can those funny pictures and signs they are cutting be
_writing_?” asked Rachel, watching a man who was graving strange marks
on the granite blocks.

“Such was the writing of the ancient Egyptians,” replied Sheshà,
“called in later days _hieroglyphics, or secret_ writing, because, as
ages passed, the meaning of the writing was forgotten, and men gazed at
these strange signs and wondered what they meant, and what secrets were
hidden from them by a language which no one could read.”

“And did they _ever_ find out the secret?” asked Rachel, eagerly. “Can
anyone nowadays read what is written on stones like these?”

“Yes. The secret has at last been discovered. For thousands of years it
was hidden, but at last, in modern days, almost within the life-time of
some old men and women still on this earth, the mystery was revealed by
means of a magic stone.”

“I know!” cried Rachel excitedly. “That was the piece of marble I
was looking at when I met you in the British Museum—was it a minute
ago, or ages?” she went on, looking puzzled. “It all seems like a
dream, somehow. But I remember Miss Moore, saying ‘This is the Rosetta
Stone’—and I didn’t know what she meant. And then _you_ said, ‘_That
stone is a gate into the Past_,’ and I didn’t know what you meant,
either!”

Again Sheshà smiled gravely as he looked down at her.

“I will tell you. Ninety years ago, a Frenchman was living in this
mysterious land of Egypt; knowing no more of the secret writing on
palaces and tombs and temples than do you, little maiden. But while he
was at _Rosetta_, which is a town on the sea coast not far from where
we stand, he found a broken block of marble—a fragment from what was
once, perhaps, a mighty temple. Upon it he saw the secret marks he
could not understand, but _beneath_ it were some lines in Greek, which
he and other people _could_ read. Now, thought the Frenchman, ‘What
if these Greek words should be the translation of those hieroglyphics
above, which no one for thousands of years has been able to decipher?’
So he brought the broken stone away with him. And the scholars examined
it, and at last, after patient study, comparing the Greek words,
which they _could_ understand, with the mysterious signs and pictures
above, they learnt to read _them_ also. And so, from that piece of
black marble which now rests in the great museum of your great city of
London, learned men have made Egypt give up one of its many secrets.
All that is written on columns, walls and tombs, can now be read by
the scholars who have studied the hieroglyphic writing of this ancient
land, and translated it into English and French, and all the languages
of men who live to-day. Was I not right to call ‘the _Rosetta_ Stone’ a
stone of magic, a gateway into the Past?”

[Illustration: PHARAOH IN HIS CHARIOT]

“Oh, yes!” exclaimed Rachel, drawing a long breath. “If that Rosetta
Stone had never been found, people would still be looking at the—what
did you call the writing? Oh yes, the _hieroglyphics_, and wondering
what they mean, wouldn’t they? But you know, of course? You have always
known.”

“I wrote signs and figures like these, six thousand years ago,” replied
Sheshà, gazing upon the mighty unfinished Pyramid upon which, like
clustering bees, the brown-skinned, half-naked men were slaving.

“Will you read me something that’s written there? Please read what that
man has just finished carving,” begged Rachel, pointing to a youth who
was working at the base of the Pyramid. “What do those signs mean?”

“They record,” said Sheshà, glancing at them, “that a hundred thousand
men were always kept working upon this tomb. These slaves that you
behold are the last hundred thousand, for as you see the Pyramid is
nearly built. But for twenty years previous to this moment of Past
time, every day, a hundred thousand men have been working in the same
way as these poor slaves before your eyes.”

Rachel was just trying to put into words something of all the wonder
and bewilderment she felt, when a strain of music that sounded rather
faint and far away made her turn quickly. The sight she saw was so
wonderful that I scarcely know how to describe it.

“Who is this?” she whispered. “Why are the people bowing down before
him?”

“It is Pharaoh the king, come to look at his Pyramid—the tomb for
himself which is rising under the hands of his slaves. Well may you
gaze in wonder, O child, for never before this, has a little English
maid been given sight of the far, far Past. You behold Pharaoh in all
his pomp and glory as he lived six thousand years ago.”

And indeed Rachel gazed in wonder.

Looking down from the raised platform of soil on which stood the nearly
finished Pyramid, she saw a broad road, thronged with a glittering
company. In their midst, standing upright in a chariot painted with
brilliant colours and enriched with gold, was the imposing figure of
a man with an olive-tinted skin, dressed in a white robe, bordered
with gold. A head-dress strangely shaped almost shrouded his face, and
on his bare brown arms were bracelets, and hanging from his neck long
chains of metal work.

Running beside and behind the chariot, were slaves carrying great fans,
made, some of palm leaves, some of feathers. They were followed by a
crowd of girls in gauzy robes, whose black hair fell in tight ringlets
on their bare shoulders, holding in their hands musical instruments of
curious form. Behind them followed other chariots filled with men clad
in the same sort of dress as that worn by Sheshà.

[Illustration]

Rachel saw the wonderful procession clearly enough, yet it seemed as
though she was looking at it through a slight mist which quivered
like hot air, and made the figures behind it a little unreal, as if
something in a dream. This gauze-like mist she had noticed before, in
gazing at the workers on the Pyramid. It stretched between her and the
slaves like a barrier behind which, though she could watch them, they
toiled out of touch, and somehow a long way from her.

“You are beholding scenes that took place thousands of years ago,
remember,” said the voice of Sheshà, and though Rachel had not spoken,
she knew he read her thoughts, and was explaining. “Ages ago all these
people were turned to dust. They have arisen before your eyes—but only
like painted figures real though they seem. If you tried to touch them
your hand would but meet the air.”

“What is he going to do? Where is he going?” whispered Rachel, who was
feeling awe-struck, and perhaps a little frightened.

“Pharaoh is going to look at the tomb which has been prepared for him,”
said Sheshà, gravely. “In a moment we will follow him into the heart of
the Pyramid.”

“_Pharaoh_ comes into the Bible,” began Rachel, looking puzzled. “But I
thought you said it was another man, King Cheops, who had this Pyramid
built.”

“_Pharaoh_ was the name given to _all_ the kings of Egypt, but this is
not the Pharaoh who dreamt of the fat and lean kine, nor the Pharaoh
Moses knew, who was stricken with plagues. _This_ Pharaoh, whose other
name was King _Cheops_, lived long before the days of Joseph and Moses.”

Rachel gave a funny little murmur of excitement.

“We _have_ gone back far into the Past, haven’t we? It’s—it’s rather
frightening. I feel as though I should never get home again!” She
looked really anxious, and Sheshà laid his brown hand gently upon her
head.

“Have no fear. In less time than I take to say it, you will be seated
in an omnibus, travelling back to your aunt’s home,” he declared with a
curious smile.

“Oh, but I don’t want to go yet!” Rachel hastily assured him. “I want
to see everything. It’s so _frightfully_ interesting,” she went on,
incoherently.

“Again have no fear. You shall see and hear, for Time itself is a
‘magic’ thing, little maiden, and wonders can be worked during the
opening and shutting of the eyes. Let us now follow that procession to
the royal tomb.”

The painted chariot drawn by white horses with marvellous trappings,
had now been reined up before the entrance to a passage on one side
of the Pyramid. On either hand the workmen and the other people who
had been passing to and fro now lay prostrate in the dust, while the
great king was led from the chariot by the men Rachel had already seen
dressed in robes like that worn by Sheshà.

“Those are the priests of the order to which I belong,” he said.
“They are the people nearest to Pharaoh, the learned men whom he
honours—poets, historians, physicians, as well as priests. With them
he talks and takes counsel. These others,” he pointed to the poor men
on the ground, “are his slaves who bow down before him, and are used as
beasts of burden.”

[Illustration]

Rachel looked at them pityingly as with Sheshà she followed the wise
men and the reigning Pharaoh, King Cheops, into the passage hewn within
the Pyramid. No one noticed her presence, and somehow, though she was
almost close enough to touch the robes in front of her, Rachel was not
surprised. Plainly, as through the quivering haze surrounding them she
could see the wonderful group of people, she knew they were not exactly
_real_. She could not have touched them. She saw their lips move, but
she heard no sound.

In a few minutes the passage, which sloped upwards, broadened out
into a little hall lined with polished granite. Here the priests
who were following the mighty Pharaoh, very slowly and solemnly
ranged themselves against the walls, leaving the middle of the floor
clear. Rachel then saw the king standing alone, and looking down upon
something that looked like a coffin made of red granite placed in the
centre of the hall. The priests bowed their heads, and she saw their
lips moving, while the king stood motionless as a statue, his white
robes and his strange head-dress appearing as though they were carved
upon a painted figure.

For a second Rachel saw this, and then almost before she could breathe,
she was standing under the blue sky, looking at the scarcely finished
outside of the Pyramid, from which all the builders had disappeared, as
had also the crowds upon the road bordering the river Nile.

She rubbed her eyes. “It’s so strange,” she began, dreamily. “Was all
that great Pyramid built only to hold a little grave? Because I suppose
that was what the stone thing that the king looked down on, really was?”

“It was the outside _case_ of a coffin—yes,” said Sheshà. “Such a case
is called a _sarcophagus_. The real coffin was made of wood, placed
within the sarcophagus, upon which a granite lid was fixed and sealed
down when a man was dead.”

“Why did this Pharaoh want such a great place only for a tomb?” asked
Rachel, still puzzled. “Fancy making thousands and thousands of people
work, just to build a great heap over a grave! Why did he do it?”

“Partly because he wanted to be remembered for ever (and though he was
forgotten for ages, we are now talking about him after six thousand
years!) But also because of what was taught by the ancient religion of
the Egyptians.”

“What was that?” asked Rachel.

Sheshà smiled, his grave, strange smile. “It taught many things
difficult to explain to a little maid of to-day. But one thing was
this. When a man died, his soul left his body, and wandered about,
entering into other bodies—possibly for hundreds of years. But it
might happen that, after many ages, the soul should want to return
to its old home—its old body. Therefore, that body was carefully
preserved, in case the soul should wish to re-enter it.”

“But if it was very long before it wanted to come back it would find
its home turned to dust, wouldn’t it?”

“For that we provided,” answered Sheshà, “by preserving the poor body
in a way that is called _embalming_. We filled it with sweet spices,
and wrapped it closely in linen bandages, and——”

“I know! The dead people like that are called _mummies_, aren’t they?
I was just going to ask Miss Moore to take me to see them when I met
you!” Rachel interrupted.

[Illustration]

“There are many such embalmed bodies in your great museum. When you see
them, little maid, remember that you are looking upon the very features
of men and women who lived under this blue sky, and enjoyed this
sunshine, thousands of years before their bodies were taken to your
grey city beside the Thames. They were people who worshipped indeed,
but gods very different from the God worshipped in your churches and
cathedrals of to-day.”

“You worshipped the river, didn’t you?” asked Rachel, presently, as
Sheshà was silent.

“Osiris, God of the River and the Sun,” murmured Sheshà, as though to
himself. “Him we worshipped, and Isis, the fruitful Earth, and—” He
paused suddenly, and looked down at Rachel. “Our worship is difficult
for you to understand. Would it please you instead, to behold this
place as it looks _now_—to the travellers of To-day. As your father,
for instance, beheld it only this morning?”

“Oh _yes_,” cried Rachel eagerly. “That’s just what I _should_ like.”

“Prepare then to see _nine_, instead of one of these mighty
works—eight of them built after this first Pyramid of King Cheops,
but, even so, thousands of years old, and battered not so much by the
hand of Time as by the hands of destructive men. Turn towards the
river, child of To-day, and, with closed eyes, bow seven times.”

Rachel again obeyed, and, when she turned and looked, instead of one,
a group of Pyramids stood up grandly against such a sunset sky as she
had never before imagined. The sand of the desert, the flowing river,
the worn sides of the huge buildings, were washed by a rosy glow. And
battered and worn, as they now looked, they were still the Pyramids as
they had stood for thousands and thousands of years before she was born.

Changed though it was, Rachel recognised at once the great tomb of
King Cheops, and as she looked she listened to Sheshà speaking, though
somehow the voice sounded faint and far away.

“_All things dread Time, but Time itself dreads the Pyramids_,” she
heard him say. And then, after a moment, “Gaze well, O child, upon one
of the Seven Wonders of the World.”

The last words came so faintly that Rachel turned to look at her
friend—and instead found Miss Moore at her elbow.

She was still consulting her watch, and Rachel was still standing in
front of the black Rosetta Stone.

“I think we ought to go,” said Miss Moore. “It will take us some time
to get back, and we mustn’t be late for lunch.”

Rachel drew a long breath, and followed her governess in silence.

When you have just stepped out of Egypt into the British Museum, you
feel you don’t want to talk—and Rachel scarcely spoke all the way home.

On the hall table, waiting for her, lay a letter from her father, and
his little daughter eagerly pounced upon it, and ran with it to her
bedroom. Mother was much better already, the letter said, and, after a
great deal of other news, Rachel came upon a sentence which interested
her more than her father could have imagined, when he wrote it.

“I have just seen the Pyramids! One of these days you and I will go to
Egypt and look at them again together. But you must learn something
about them first, or you won’t be half so excited about them as I am.”

Rachel laughed gleefully. “Dad hasn’t seen King Cheops, anyhow,” she
thought. “And he’d be certain to think I dreamt it if I told him all
about Sheshà and the slaves. No one would believe me—so I shan’t say
anything about this lovely adventure.”

She ran down to lunch, happy and excited by her secret.

“Well, how did you enjoy the British Museum?” enquired Aunt Hester,
when she had heard all the news contained in the letter from Egypt.

“Oh, I _loved_ it!” exclaimed Rachel, and two little dimples appeared
at the corners of her mouth as she tried to repress a smile. “When can
I go again?”

Miss Moore looked a little surprised, for she remembered no particular
enthusiasm on Rachel’s part during the morning.

“A most instructive place,” she observed, turning to Aunt Hester. “I’m
sure Rachel will learn a great deal there.”

And again Rachel tried to keep back a smile.

[Illustration]




SECOND WONDER

[Illustration: THE HANGING GARDENS OF BABYLON]


All the rest of that day Rachel went about feeling excited and happy.
It was not till next morning when she woke that doubt crept into her
mind. Could she _really_ have been to Egypt and seen the great Pyramid
of Cheops before it was quite finished? Surely, she couldn’t _really_
have talked to Sheshà, the priest of that ancient king! It must, of
course, have been a dream. Yet how had she managed to go to sleep
in the British Museum? And how was it, if she had dreamt the whole
adventure, that she remembered everything distinctly, and not in the
confused fashion of an ordinary dream? Rachel was puzzled, but she was
obliged to come to the sad conclusion that somehow or other the glowing
pictures in her mind, of slaves, of Pharaoh in his chariot, of the room
within the Pyramid holding the sarcophagus, were, as her old nurse used
to say, “all imagination.”

It was a terribly disappointing thought, and for the whole of the
following day she felt quite dull and miserable, especially as Aunt
Hester wouldn’t hear of another immediate visit to the British Museum.

“It’s too far,” she declared. “You may go next week. But I can’t
think why you’re so anxious about it. Miss Moore says you didn’t seem
particularly interested while you were there.”

Rachel couldn’t of course tell Aunt Hester that in her longing for
the British Museum, there was a faint hope that if by any chance the
adventure had been “real”—there, if anywhere, “something might happen.”

A few mornings afterwards, however, something _did_ happen. At
breakfast time Aunt Hester put down a letter she had been reading, and
looked across at her niece.

“Old Mr. Sheston is coming to lunch,” she remarked. “He says he thinks
he must have seen you the other day. He knew you from your likeness to
your father.”

“Who is old Mr. Sheston?” asked Rachel, looking up from putting more
sugar on her porridge.

Aunt Hester smiled. “He’s a funny old man who has been a friend of
our family for years, and knew your father as a boy. He is doing some
important work at the British Museum, so you’ll be able to talk to him
about it.”

Rachel pricked up her ears.

“Why is he funny?” she enquired.

Again Aunt Hester smiled. “He dresses in a strange way for one thing,
and he has all sorts of curious ideas that you wouldn’t understand.
He’s a dear old man—but eccentric. Certainly eccentric,” she added as
though to herself.

“_Eccentric_ means not like other people, doesn’t it?” murmured Rachel.
“I’ve never heard Dad talk about him.”

“I don’t think he’s seen him since he was a boy.... Certainly you _are_
very like your father as he was at your age, child! I’m not surprised
that the old man recognized you.”

Rachel was running across the hall just before lunch, when in answer
to a knock at the front door, the parlourmaid admitted a strange
figure, wrapped in a long cloak, one end of which was thrown over the
left shoulder. A battered hat almost hid the face of the little old
gentleman who entered—but in a flash Rachel remembered him. He was
looking at the Rosetta Stone the day she and Miss Moore went to the
British Museum! And he had spoken to her—or had she dreamt this? It
was curious, but she really couldn’t remember. All she knew at the
moment was, that he and the Rosetta Stone were, as she put it, “mixed
up together in her mind.”

By this time the visitor had taken off his hat, and Rachel, so puzzled
and curious that she had stopped short in the middle of the hall, saw a
pair of dark eyes in a crinkled, wrinkled face under a fringe of white
hair.

The old man smiled and held out both hands.

“You are Rachel,” he said. “I knew when I saw you last week in the
Egyptian gallery, that you must be your father’s daughter.”

Rachel felt suddenly shy, and was glad when Aunt Hester came down the
stairs and, after a word or two of greeting, led the way straight into
the dining-room.

At table, during the meal, Rachel sat opposite to the guest, who now
and then looked across at her, and every time she met his dark eyes she
was puzzled afresh.

“You’ll be glad to hear that Rachel is _most_ interested in the British
Museum,” said Aunt Hester, presently.

“I _am_ glad to hear it,” was all the old man said, but he smiled in
such a way as to make Rachel more excited and puzzled than ever.

She listened eagerly to what he was saying to Aunt Hester. He was
talking about what he called the “explorations” in Egypt, and she
gathered from his conversation that men were often sent out by the
people who took charge of the British Museum, to dig and explore among
the ruins in Egypt and other ancient countries, and to bring back some
of the things they found to London.

He made the story of these explorers and what they discovered, so
exciting, that Aunt Hester, who did not at first seem very curious,
began to ask questions. Rachel wanted to ask a great many more, for her
head was still full of her strange dream—as she now called it—about
Egypt, and it was interesting to know how all the tombs and monuments
and statues she had seen last week had found their way to England.

“You can run away now, Rachel,” said Aunt Hester, when lunch was over,
and Grayson was bringing in coffee.

“Don’t let her run very far,” observed Mr. Sheston. “Because I’m going
to take her back with me to the Museum in ten minutes.”

He said this without looking at her, and Rachel gasped for joy, and
glanced imploringly at Aunt Hester, who laughed.

“You always _announce_ what you are going to do, I remember,” she
declared, speaking to her guest. “You never _ask_.”

“A habit of mine,” returned the old gentleman quietly. “Acquired long
ago.”

“Go and get ready,” said Aunt Hester, with a nod to her niece, and
Rachel flew like the wind.

Ten minutes later she was seated in a taxi-cab with Mr. Sheston, who
talked about her father, about her country home, her brothers and
sisters, and everything in the world except just the things Rachel
wanted him to talk about—Egypt and the Pyramids.

At last, however, he said quite suddenly, just as they were going up
the steps of the Museum, “How long is it since you were here?”

“Five or six days, I think, or perhaps—”

“_Seven_ days,” corrected the old gentleman, quietly, and all at once
Rachel began to get excited.

They entered the building, and she noticed that all the officials in
uniform touched their hats to the little old man who was evidently very
well known there. He turned at once to the Egyptian Gallery, and as
they passed the Rosetta Stone, Rachel looked back.

“I know all about _that_,” she said, glancing up at Mr. Sheston, who
only smiled.

“We will go to the Babylonian Room in a minute,” he said. “Do you know
where to find Babylonia on the map?”

Only that morning, in looking as she always did now, for Egypt, Rachel
had seen it marked in her atlas.

“It’s up above Arabia, isn’t it?” she began, uncertainly “Up above the
Persian Gulf.”

“And do you remember any of its cities that were famous once?”

“Babylon?” suggested Rachel.

Mr. Sheston nodded.

“Babylon,” he repeated, and after a moment added, as though to himself,
“_How far is it to Babylon?_”

“Why, that’s in a book of poetry I’ve got,” exclaimed Rachel. “It’s
called ‘A Child’s Garden of Verses.’”

“Yes, there are a great many things in Stevenson’s Child’s Garden,”
said the old man. “We’ll find out how far it is to Babylon presently.
But, before we do that, just come into this room for a moment.”

He took her hand and led her into a narrow passage to the right of the
big Egyptian hall through which they had come.

“Is there anything here that reminds you of—something else?” he asked.

Rachel glanced about, and suddenly her eyes rested on a monument
against a wall, carved curiously in stone. Beneath it there was an
inscription, and she went nearer and began to read the words aloud.

“_The tomb of Sheshà, High Priest of Cheops_,” she began, and suddenly
stopped short.

“Why...!” she exclaimed, turning to Mr. Sheston, and then again
stopped short, for in his place stood her friend Sheshà in his
beautiful robe, his young face framed by the strange head-dress she so
well remembered! And yet—somehow—it was Mr. Sheston too! Sheshà and
the old man were in a curious way one and the same person!

“Why, you _are_ Sheshà!” cried Rachel, incoherently. “But
then—why?”—she glanced at the tomb—“That means you were _dead_—ages
and ages ago?” she whispered. “How can you be here—?”

The young priest smiled. “Tombs are but folly,” he answered. “Do you
remember, little maid, what I said to you of the soul, and how it lives
and returns after many thousand years to inhabit the same, or perhaps
another body?”

Rachel nodded, too overwhelmed to speak.

“Well, then, are not tombs folly?” he repeated, still smiling. “But
come, of Egypt you have had a glimpse already. Now shall you behold
Babylon.”

He turned and led the way towards another gallery running parallel
with the Egyptian one, and, as Rachel followed him, she wondered for a
moment why the people strolling about in the Museum did not stare in
amazement at the wonderful figure of Sheshà in his priestly robe. No
one took the slightest notice, however, and she remembered that Miss
Moore had on a previous occasion seen and heard nothing.

“They’re not mixed up with _seven_, I suppose,” she reflected, before
Sheshà began to speak again. He talked, she thought, rather as though
he were translating from another language, trying to make what he said
quite modern. “But sometimes,” thought Rachel, “he forgets—and then he
says ‘_behold_,’ and ‘_verily_,’ and old-fashioned words like that!”

“Let us first look at some of the wonders which, long buried, have
come at last to this Museum,” he suggested, pausing in front of a huge
statue. It represented a creature with the body of a bull, and the face
of a man with a long curled beard cut square—while from the shoulders
of the beast sprang two great wings.

“Here is one out of many such marvels,” he added.

Rachel looked at the monster, full of curiosity.

“Was _this_ dug up by the people you were talking about to Aunt Hester
to-day? I mean—at lunch time—when you were—Mr. Sheston?”

Sheshà smiled. “I was the same person then as now. It was only my
body that was different.... Yes, little maid, this was found by the
explorers not far from Babylon. Now glance with me at these pictures in
stone.” He turned into a narrow gallery close at hand, and pointed to
the walls against which were fastened large slabs of stone sculptured
most beautifully with scenes of hunting, with processions in which
kings rode in chariots under graceful canopies like parasols hung with
fringe, or stood looking down upon long lines of prisoners chained
together.

“These came from the palace of one Tiglath Pileser, a king who lived
more than seven hundred years before Christ was born. He was one of the
conquerors of Babylon.”

“But I do want to see Babylon itself!” exclaimed Rachel. “You did mean
I should _really_ see it, didn’t you?”

“Patience!” murmured Sheshà. “Patience! You are just about to see
Babylon first as it is now—and then as it was in the days of its
splendour. Shut your eyes. Beat seven times with your foot on this
stone floor—and have no fear of what befalls. You are safe with me.”

Trembling with excitement, Rachel did as she was told, and at the
last tap of her foot, was conscious of a most strange and wonderful
sensation. She seemed to be out of doors, and not only out of doors,
but rushing through the air, while a noise like that of a great engine
almost deafened her.

“We are near Babylon!” said a voice close to her ear, and, as she
opened her eyes, Rachel gasped, for she was seated in an aeroplane,
and the pilot of the machine, in the dress of an airman, was—Sheshà!
Rachel had so often longed to fly, that at first she could think of
nothing but the wonder and excitement of her first rush through the
air, and it was only by degrees that she began to notice the earth
below. The machine was dropping nearer to it now, and she saw they
were flying over a vast plain through which flowed a river. Three
large mounds near this river broke the monotony of the desert place,
overarched by the beautiful blue sky, and when the aeroplane skimmed
yet lower, Rachel saw little figures moving near the mounds, like ants
running over an ant heap.

At the same moment the noise of the aeroplane’s engine ceased, and she
was able to talk to the pilot.

“Why those are _men_, aren’t they?” she said, pointing to the tiny
figures. “And what are those heaps of rubbish there?”

“All that is left of Babylon—the beautiful and proud City of Babylon,”
answered the voice of the pilot, Sheshà.

Rachel looked at the desert plain with its three “rubbish heaps,” as
she called them, in silent astonishment.

“Is _that_ where the bulls with wings and the other things in the
British Museum come from?” she added at length.

“Some of them—yes.”

“And are those little men down there digging up other things now?”

“Yes. They are working for the Museum. By-and-by, in a few weeks,
perhaps, you may read a column in your newspaper at breakfast time
giving an account of the latest things found in that heap,” he pointed
to the largest of them. “That mound below you is called _Babil_, and
it covers the palace in which dwelt King Nebuchadnezzar, nearly three
thousand years ago.”

“The Nebuchadnezzar in the Bible that I was reading about with Miss
Moore only this morning?”

“Yes—the Nebuchadnezzar who conquered the city of Jerusalem and
brought the Children of Israel captives to Babylon—the Nebuchadnezzar
who set up the golden image to which Daniel would not bow down.”

“And the fiery furnace!” interrupted Rachel, eagerly, “that didn’t
burn the three Children of Israel when Nebuchadnezzar threw them into
it.... I remember!... And there’s a psalm about them when they were
prisoners in Babylon.”

“_By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept when
we remembered Zion_,” quoted Sheshà, in a dreamy voice. “There is
one of the rivers of Babylon.” He pointed to the great stream—the
Euphrates—on both sides of which the city was built.

“It doesn’t look as though there could ever have been a city here,”
Rachel declared, gazing down upon the desert and the mounds of earth.
“How could it have disappeared altogether like that?”

“Thousands of years have passed since it was standing. It has been
burnt to the ground many times, and laid in ruins. The sand of the
desert has swept over it, and new races of men have arisen, knowing
nothing of its ancient grandeur. It is only sixty years ago that
scholars from France and Germany and England began to explore those
heaps of rubbish which cover its palaces and temple.”

“Oh, I _do_ want to see them!” exclaimed Rachel. “I mean as they used
to look when Nebuchadnezzar was king. Not just the bits of them that
people dig up now!”

“We will make a landing,” said Sheshà in a matter-of-fact voice, and
in a few moments the aeroplane had touched the ground, and he was
helping her to jump out of the marvellous machine, which, surrounded as
she was by so many other marvels, Rachel took almost as though she had
been used to an aeroplane all her life.

“You behold Babylon as it looks to-day,” went on Sheshà, stretching
out his hand towards the ruins. “In a second you shall behold it as it
looked three thousand years ago when Nebuchadnezzar was king. And your
guide shall be a little maid of your own years.” Almost before he had
finished speaking he laid his hand gently over Rachel’s eyes....

“Count the magic number aloud.”

The voice that spoke certainly did not belong to Sheshà, and when full
of eagerness her eyes flew open they rested first of all upon the
loveliest and strangest little girl you can possibly imagine.

Her hair, black as ebony, was cut straight across her forehead, and
fell in tight ringlets to her shoulders. She wore a thin gauze robe
spangled with gold, and on her bare brown arms there were bracelets,
and round her slim little ankles golden anklets, which tinkled as she
moved.

As her great dark eyes met Rachel’s blue ones she said gravely:

“I am Salome, handmaid to the Queen of this city of Babylon. Come with
me and you shall see all its riches and its glory. Sheshà has commanded
it.”

Rachel was too bewildered to wonder how it happened that she understood
the child, who was certainly not talking English. But, strange language
though it was, she seemed to know it as well as her native tongue.
There were besides, other and even stranger things to amaze her, for
before her, under the burning blue sky, was spread a gorgeous city,
or rather what looked like miles and miles of gardens and palaces and
temples, enclosed within huge walls.

From the slightly raised ground on which Rachel with her new companion
were standing, she could see these city walls—a double row of
them—stretching away to form a gigantic square enclosing the river,
the woods and gardens, and all the strange buildings which made up the
city.

“Oh look! look!” she cried suddenly, as all at once, actually on the
_top_ of one of the inner walls, she saw a brilliantly painted chariot
drawn by four horses, coming at a furious pace towards her. It was
driven by a long-haired man who stood upright within the car, urging on
his steeds—till he came so near the end of the wall that Rachel held
her breath, expecting to see chariot, horses and driver dashed to the
ground. But, before she could cry out, the man, with marvellous skill,
turned horses and chariot, and drove at full speed back again along the
wide top of the wall.

[Illustration]

“Just _think_ of a wall broad enough for four horses to gallop
along—and _turn_!” Rachel almost screamed the words in her excitement.

“That is Akurgal, the driver of the king’s chariot,” said the little
Babylonian girl, unconcernedly. “He drives like the wind for fury when
it pleases him.”

Rachel scarcely knew in which direction to look first, so glorious
was the view. She saw that each of the four sides of the wall was
pierced by gigantic gates made of bronze—all the gates opening upon
broad streets which crossed one another, so that the whole city was
divided into squares, filled with gardens and houses. The broad river
flowed through it from north to south, and over the river hung a mighty
bridge, at each end of which was a palace.

It was difficult for Rachel to make up her mind in which direction
to turn her eyes, but the sight of something that appeared like a
forest-covered mountain rising near one of the palaces, was so lovely
that she pointed to it and turned to Salome.

“What a beautiful mountain!” she exclaimed. “How funny there should be
only _one_—because the rest of the country is so flat. There isn’t
another hill as far as ever I can see,” she added, glancing over the
wide plain in which the city lay.

Salome smiled.

“That is no mountain,” she said. “It was made by human hands. It is the
great glory of our city, and, so my mistress says, in time to come, the
Hanging Gardens of Babylon will be called one of the Wonders of the
World.”

Rachel started. “There are seven Wonders of the World,” she began,
eagerly. “I’ve seen one of them already—the Great Pyramid, you know.
And now——”

“I have heard of the Pyramid in the land of Egypt,” Salome interrupted.
“But come now and see more closely _our_ wonder—the Garden that is
like no other in the world.”

She took Rachel’s hand, and in a few moments they had entered the city
through a gate which Rachel noticed was covered with tiles of blue
enamel as brilliant as the sky above them. And on either side of the
gate, like sentinels, stood huge winged bulls carved in stone. But how
different they looked here, she thought, in the golden sunshine, with
the wonderful blue tiles behind them, and their great shadows, black as
ink, stretching on either hand!

“This is one of the new gates built by our king,” Salome told her. “He
has caused inscriptions to be written about them so that all the world
may know what adornments he has added to our fair city of Babylon. Our
city that shall last for ever,” she added proudly.

Rachel glanced at her, and thought of a great rubbish heap she had
recently seen—“_the mound called Babil which covers the palace in
which dwelt King Nebuchadnezzar nearly three thousand years ago_”—she
remembered the very words of Sheshà.... How amazing it was to be
walking with this little girl in the very city that now lay under a
mound of earth! To be talking to a little girl who lived nearly three
thousand years ago, and had no idea that her home was even now being
dug up in fragments by men living in the world to-day!... For a moment
it all seemed too puzzling to be true. Rachel rubbed her eyes with her
disengaged hand, and half expected the whole vision to disappear. Yet
when she looked again, the lovely scene still lay before her, and she
could feel the warmth of Salome’s little brown hand within her own.

[Illustration]

“I must be getting used to the Past,” she reflected. “Because now I can
_feel_ as well as see the people. They didn’t seem quite real when I
was with Sheshà in Egypt. But now it’s different. Is it because _these_
people didn’t live quite so far back into the Past as King Cheops and
his slaves, I wonder?”

She glanced again at the grave, strangely clad little girl at her side,
who talked as though she were quite grown up.

“I mustn’t say anything about the rubbish mound, or tell her anything
about the sort of world _I_ belong to,” she reflected hurriedly. “She
wouldn’t understand. I suppose she thinks I’m living in her times,
but have just never happened to see Babylon before. And that’s quite
true!” she added to herself, with a little inward chuckle.

While such thoughts as these were hurrying through her mind, she was
looking right and left, full of eager curiosity, for the bridge she was
crossing was thronged with amazing figures.

Men with black, curling beards, bare-legged, and bare-armed, wearing
tunics of brilliant colours, passed her. Some of these were seated
upon the backs of camels following one another in long lines. The
soft-footed, grey beasts were loaded with merchandise, and the bales
on either side of their humped backs swayed as they moved. They were
decked fantastically with trappings of plaited scarlet wool, hung with
tassels of brilliant colour. After such a procession of camels and
their drivers, would come perhaps a chariot with four horses abreast,
driven by a fierce-looking man in a gorgeous fringed robe, whose dark
eyes flashed like jewels in his bronzed face. Following one such
chariot, she saw a group of girls in gauzy tunics, bracelets on their
arms, tinkling anklets above their feet, dancing as they came, and
singing a wild song as they tossed their arms above their heads.

“They are going to the Temple of Belus,” explained Salome, as Rachel
stood still to look at them.

She turned round and pointed with her little brown forefinger to a
great building at the other end of the bridge.

“Later, if there is still time, you shall see the temple of the great
God. But let us hasten now towards the gardens, for there, in the
cool of the day, the queen walks with her maidens, and I must be in
attendance.”

Rachel was torn between her longing to be actually within the wonderful
Hanging Garden and her desire to linger on the bridge which afforded
such a magnificent view. She gazed with delight upon the broad shining
river which divided the city, and upon the ships with gracefully curved
sails which, rowed by almost naked slaves, moved to and fro over its
surface.

Some of these ships were drawn up against the quays which lined the
river, as far as eye could reach, and Rachel saw a swarming multitude
of men staggering under corded chests of wood which the ships had
brought to be unloaded.

Salome stopped to watch the slaves at their work.

“That is merchandise for the palace, I trust,” she observed. “We have
awaited it too long, and the queen grows angry.”

“What sort of things are in those boxes?” Rachel asked.

“Ivory and ebony for the thrones, and for the couches and the chariots,
emeralds and fine linen, and coral and agate. Spices from Arabia and
precious stones and gold,” answered Salome, in a sort of chanting voice.

[Illustration]

Rachel gasped. It sounded like a fairy tale. Yet she remembered
something like it—Where was it? In the Bible, surely!

Just as the thought of the Bible crossed her mind, a group of men
passed close to her. They were dressed rather differently from the
other people around her, their faces, too, looked different, and their
eyes were very sad.

“Who are those men?” she enquired, looking back over her shoulder.
“They look so unhappy—and _homesick_, somehow.” Rachel knew what it
was to be homesick!

Salome glanced at them carelessly. “They are Hebrews who
call themselves the Children of Israel. Our king, the great
Nebuchadnezzar—may he live for ever—conquered their country and took
their treasures from Jerusalem, their chief city, and brought many of
them here to Babylon to live. They hate us, and we despise them.”

Rachel started as the words of the psalm darted into her mind. “_By
the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down.... We hanged our harps upon
the willows_....” She had heard this sung in church, and it had meant
nothing to her but just “a psalm.” Yet, here before her very eyes now,
was one of “the rivers.” There were “the willows” fringing streams
which flowed through the innumerable gardens, and she had just met some
of the captive Jews! Rachel gasped again as all these things became
“real” to her—something that had actually happened—was, in fact,
happening before her eyes.

“It’s awful to be homesick,” she murmured, rather to herself than to
Salome, who, without replying, ran on in front of her to a flight of
steps at the end of the bridge.

“This is one of the entrances to the Hanging Garden,” she explained,
looking back. “We must hasten, lest my mistress calls for me.”

Rachel followed her from terrace to terrace, too overwhelmed with
delight at the glimpses of beauty she caught right and left to say a
word. She saw that the whole garden was supported, tier above tier, by
gigantic arches, and Salome told her each terrace was made of plates
of lead, holding earth so deep that great forest trees could grow in
it. If she had not known this, the whole place would have seemed to
Rachel as though blossoming by magic in the heart of a forest growing
in mid-air. She could scarcely believe it was not the work of some
magician.

By the time they reached the uppermost terrace, on a level with the
city wall, she was not only breathless, but struck dumb by the beauty
and wonder of everything round her.

Mighty cedar trees spread their layers of branches between her and
the burning blue sky. The air was perfumed with the scent from groves
of lemon trees. Fountains tossed their sparkling drops high into the
sunshine. Red roses swept in cascades from her feet down the slope
to the terraces below. Along paths paved with tiles of sapphire-blue
enamel, peacocks walked delicately with outspread tails, and far below,
within its four-square walls, the city of Babylon lay glittering in
such brilliant sunshine as in her own country she had never dreamt of,
nor faintly imagined.

And now, before she had time to recover from her amazement, a new sight
was presented, for, coming slowly in her direction, but as yet in the
distance, a group of people approached. In the midst of them, as the
little procession drew nearer, Rachel saw a lovely woman leaning back
in a litter slung between ivory poles and borne by four slaves. The
litter was covered with silk hangings of a rich purple, and a fringed
canopy of the same material supported on poles also of ivory, was held
above the swinging couch by four dark-skinned girls.

“The Queen Amytis,” whispered Salome, and Rachel drew back in sudden
fright. “She will wonder who I am—and I shan’t know what to say,” she
began, hurriedly. “I don’t know how to talk to queens.”

“Have no fear, she will not see you. No one here sees you but me.
That is the work of Sheshà, who is greatest of all magicians and has
entrusted you to me, why I know not—nor do I know with any certainty
who you are. But he has commanded me to be your guide here in Babylon.
No one sees, no one hears you but I alone.”

Wondering greatly, but feeling much relieved, Rachel watched the slaves
as very carefully they set down the litter close to a throne-like seat,
covered with silken pillows. The arms of the chair she noticed, were
two-winged bulls in stone, and the back of it shone with enamelled
tiles and plates of gold. The maidens now surrounded their mistress,
helping her to rise from the litter, and, as she sank into the great
chair, Rachel gazed at her wonderful robe, made of stuff like gossamer,
clasped with a great jewel at the waist. Her slim, olive-coloured feet
were bare, and, to Rachel’s amazement, she saw the gleam of emeralds in
rings upon her toes! On her bare arms and neck there were jewels, also,
and there were emeralds in the fillet that bound her beautiful black
hair.

Never had Rachel ever dreamt of such a vision! Never indeed could she
have imagined such luxury and magnificence as she had seen since she
entered Babylon.

“It’s like—like the stories in the Arabian Nights,” she thought,
confusedly. Presently the queen spoke in that language which sounded
strange to her ears, but which with her _mind_ she somehow understood
quite well.

“Listen! One can hear the singing from the Temple of Belus.”

“To-day is a high festival. They offer sacrifices to the God,” answered
one of her maidens. “There has been great stir in the city since
sunrise.”

“But when the darkness falls there will be silence, and the wise men on
the topmost tower will watch the stars.”

Queen Amytis said this as though to herself. Her great dark eyes were
fixed upon the shining city below, and Rachel thought she looked sad
and anxious.

“The most high God will protect our lord the king on his perilous
journey,” one of her maidens declared consolingly. “And the wise men
will surely learn good tidings from the stars,” added another.

The queen did not reply, and Rachel looked enquiringly at Salome, who
was lying full length on a great tiger-skin stretched in front of her
mistress’s chair.

“Sit near me,” said the little maid, making room for her. “No one else
sees or hears you. What is it you would ask?”

“Tell me about the temple,” whispered Rachel. “That temple of Belus.”

She could see it very distinctly from where she sat, a wonderful
building with a number of storeys piled up one above the other, each
storey covered with glazed tiles of a colour different from that above
and below.

“It is the Tower of the Seven Planets—the Temple of Belus, who is the
God of our city,” Salome told her. “Our great king has lately built it
where once stood, so they say, the Tower of Babel.”

“The Tower of Babel? That’s in the Bible!” But a glance at Salome’s
face showed her that she didn’t know anything about the Bible—and she
remembered that the gods Salome and all the people here worshipped were
those the Bible called “false gods.”

“Of the Tower of Babel I know nothing but its name,” said Salome,
shrugging her shoulders. “It stood doubtless long ago. But this is a
new temple built, as they say, on its ruins. It is of seven colours,
because each of the seven planets has a different colour, so the wise
men who study the stars declare. And within the temple there stands
a golden image of the god Belus, and a golden altar upon which the
priests burn frankincense and all sweet scents in honour of the god.”

“But the queen said the wise men watch the stars there?”

“Even so. At night on the topmost storey of the tower, the priests
study the sky. They are great astronomers, and have learnt wonderful
things about the heavenly bodies, all of which are written down so that
their knowledge may not be lost to people who live after them.”

“Then I suppose that’s how _we_ began to know about the stars,” thought
Rachel. “Through these people who lived here in Babylon thousands of
years ago.” It was very strange to think of this, and strange also,
and sad, to remember that what Salome called “the new temple” was now
nothing but a heap of half-buried ruins! And, yet, there in some magic
way lay Salome before her eyes, her anklets tinkling when she moved,
and her little face full of life. And there sat the lovely queen,
surrounded by her maidens in their transparent robes! And the cedar
trees murmured overhead, and from the groves of lemon trees sweet
scents were blown, and below lay the marvellous city.

Rachel grew so confused that it was with difficulty she could prevent
herself from saying aloud all she was feeling. And this, as somehow she
knew, would be the greatest possible mistake.

“The queen is sad because the king is away, isn’t she?”

The question was put hurriedly, in case she should betray herself.

“Yes. Our great King Nebuchadnezzar is in Egypt, fighting against his
enemies. May he be preserved! The queen longs for tidings of him.”

Just at that moment the sound of quick footsteps on the blue tiled
path, behind the queen’s chair, made Rachel turn her head. A slave was
running in haste along an upper terrace.

The queen also turned and half rose from her throne-like seat as the
messenger, drawing near, threw himself face downward on the ground
before her, and then, rising and bowing low, put something into her
hand.

“A letter, perchance, from the king,” whispered Salome eagerly.

“A letter?” repeated Rachel, looking with curiosity at the strange
object.

It certainly bore no resemblance to the letters she knew, for it looked
something like a thin square brick, and though it had an envelope, that
envelope was made of _clay_ instead of paper, and had a seal upon it.

[Illustration]

Feeling quite sure by now that she was invisible to all but the eyes
of Salome, she ran to the back of the queen’s chair and watched her
break the seal, and take out what it contained. This proved to be a
small brick tablet. Upon it was carved some writing that was like, yet
unlike, the hieroglyphics she had seen in Egypt, for the letters of
which the writing was composed were wedge-shaped, with curious dots and
arrow-heads every here and there between them.

And then, smiling happily, the queen began to read the brick aloud.

“_Unto Amytis, my queen whom I love, who loveth me_, say, _It is well
with me._ With thee also may it be well.... Let the wife of the king,
my lady, be of good cheer, for a messenger of good luck from Belus
walketh beside the king of the world....”

Still smiling, she looked round her at her maidens, who all bowed low
and murmured together.

“Our lord the king, may he live for ever.”

“The great god Belus, as you hear, protects him!” exclaimed Salome,
turning to Rachel.

Suddenly the queen clapped her hands, and at the signal, her maidens
snatched up the musical instruments they had laid aside, and their
brown fingers began to sweep the strings of curiously shaped harps and
lyres as they sang a chant of rejoicing....

The sun was setting, and as she lay stretched out upon the tiger skin,
Rachel saw the city below her glowing like a heap of jewels within
the casket of its walls. The broad river was washed with gold, and
reflected in its depths she saw the purple and embroidered sails of
the ships passing and repassing, as they brought gold and ivory, fine
linen and precious stones, to enrich still further the magnificence of
Babylon. The long line of quays formed a white, glittering fringe on
either side of the river. In the gardens and open courtyards between
the houses the palms and cedar trees and masses of flowers shone like
coloured fire, and the great temple of Belus towering towards the sky,
with its seven storeys of seven colours, might have been the enchanted
palace of a magician. Rachel gazed and gazed as though she wanted to
fix the vision of so much loveliness upon her mind for ever.

But her last look after all was for the beauty of the garden in which
she sat—the Hanging Garden that might well, she thought, be called one
of the World’s Wonders! For the sun’s last rays lent an even greater
magic to the lemon groves, to the leaping cascades which flowed from
the upper terrace and were lost among the forest trees beneath; to
the pyramids of gorgeous flowers and to the group of singing girls
surrounding their lovely queen. Their gauzy robes were dyed with
crimson light, the jewels on the queen’s head-dress and on the brown
hands touching the harp-strings gleamed dazzlingly, and the voices of
the singers mingled with the deep hum of voices floating upwards from
the swarming multitudes below.

“Is not our Babylon well called ‘_the lady of kingdoms_’?” whispered
Salome. “It shall endure for ever, and in ages to come men will
travel hither to see its glories, and to gaze upon this our Hanging
Garden—one of the Wonders of the World.”

Rachel turned to look at the grave little girl who spoke like a woman,
yet was perhaps no older than herself.

For a moment she saw her great dark mournful eyes, and then, the whole
scene, the garden, the great city below with its towers and palaces,
disappeared. For yet another moment she saw the dreary desert, the
three great mounds of earth under the blue sky, and almost at the same
instant, she was walking in a gallery lined with cases, containing
stones, bricks, and various other dull-coloured objects.... “These
don’t look much like the letters the postman brings every morning, do
they?” Mr. Sheston was saying. “Yet they are the sort of letters the
Babylonians wrote to one another. These marks on the bricks were made
with a metal stick, when the clay was still moist and soft, and then
the tablet was baked, so that the writing should last practically for
ever.”

“I know!” cried Rachel. “The queen had a letter from the king
Nebuchadnezzar, and it was in a sort of clay envelope. And she read it
out, and—”

But Mr. Sheston only smiled, and went on telling her about the “brick
letters” hundreds of which had already been discovered in the ruins
that cover Babylon!

It was a curious smile, and in some way it told Rachel that she must
not talk much to Mr. Sheston about Sheshà—even though they were one
and the same person.... “Why, even the beginnings of their names are
alike!” she thought, suddenly.

“Yes, the Babylonians were wonderful people,” the old man exclaimed.
“They were astronomers as well as sculptors and metal workers, you
know. They built high towers from which they studied the stars. You
may imagine what a splendid view of the sky they would have from these
towers rising out of a flat country into air so absolutely clear that
the stars look enormously big and bright.”

“And they told fortunes by the stars, didn’t they?” Rachel asked,
remembering the king’s letter.

“Yes, they were _astrologers_, too—that is they believed that certain
planets had an effect on people’s lives. But, putting that on one
side, we have to thank them for the beginning of all the marvellous
discoveries that later astronomers have made.... Well, now, my dear,”
he went on, presently, just like any other kind old gentleman, “I’m
sure you’re ready for tea and buns.”

Rachel was quite ready, and she also quite understood that “Mr.
Sheston” and “Sheshà” wished to have very little to do with one another.

So she only said, when, half an hour later, the old man left her at
Aunt Hester’s door:

“Thank you _ever_ so much. I shall never forget Babylon, and—and—the
Hanging Garden, you know. But there are five more Wonders of the World,
aren’t there?” She could not help adding this, nor could she help a
beseeching glance at Mr. Sheston.

He laughed. “We’ll see about them, perhaps,” he said. But Rachel ran
into the house quite satisfied.

[Illustration]




THIRD WONDER

[Illustration: THE COLOSSUS OF RHODES]


One morning, several days later, Rachel received a long letter from
her father, in answer to one she had written to him before making the
acquaintance of Mr. Sheston. (Though, indeed, as she remembered, she
had even then met him without knowing it!)

“You talk about the British Museum,” he wrote, “and that reminds me
of a dear old friend of mine who works there. I don’t think I’ve ever
told you about Mr. Sheston, have I? And now I come to think of it I
don’t believe I’ve told _anyone_ all he meant to me when I was a little
boy, no older than you are now. I’ve never seen him since, but he
was better to me then than a thousand beautiful mysterious books. He
used to tell me the most wonderful stories, and I’ve never forgotten
them. He must be a very old man now. (I thought him very old _then_,
but, of course, he wasn’t really.) I believe he sometimes goes to see
your Aunt Hester, and I want you to meet him. Perhaps he will tell
you some of the strange things he told me. Perhaps even you will have
‘adventures’ when you’re with him! And perhaps not. Anyhow, if you _do_
have ‘adventures,’ take my advice and don’t talk about them. People as
a rule don’t understand Mr. Sheston, and some of them say all sorts of
silly things about him, and even think he’s mad. He isn’t. He’s the
_oldest_ and the wisest man in the world.”

Rachel folded up the letter feeling very happy. She and “Daddy” were
great friends, and she was as she said to herself “frightfully glad”
that Dad had known Mr. Sheston when he was a little boy. That hint
he gave about “adventures” pleased her very much, as also his remark
about Mr. Sheston being the oldest man in the world! Oh, yes, certainly
Dad had passed through the same sort of experiences as those she had
enjoyed since her meeting with his old friend. That was a splendid
thought. And all at once she remembered that Dad also was the seventh
child in his family. “So _he’s_ mixed up with _sevens_ too,” was her
next reflection. “He’s one of the lucky people—like me. He’ll be
awfully interested when he gets my last letter to say I’ve met Mr.
Sheston already!”

That very same morning, Aunt Hester had a note from the old man to
ask if Miss Moore would be kind enough to bring Rachel to tea at his
house the following day, at three o’clock. “I will bring her back again
myself. Don’t trouble to answer this, because I shall rely upon seeing
Rachel at the appointed time.”

Aunt Hester brought the note into the schoolroom, and, after reading it
aloud, laughed a little and shrugged her shoulders.

“This is a _command_,” she said, addressing Miss Moore. “He always gets
his own way. Will you see that the child arrives punctually?”

Rachel wanted to jump for joy.

“It’s exactly seven days since the last time I saw him,” she exclaimed.
“How exciting!”

Mr. Sheston’s house was tucked away in a little quiet square, near the
Museum. It had a narrow front-door with a brass knocker that shone with
much polishing, and above it, in the shape of a crescent, panes of
glass divided by a tracery in white plaster.

Within, the walls of hall and staircase were panelled with dark wood,
and the room into which Rachel followed her host after Miss Moore had
left her was, she thought, the nicest she had ever seen.

It had three windows, and was long and low, and like the hall,
panelled right up to the ceiling. There were cushioned window-seats,
and books everywhere, and great bowls of spring flowers on the tables.
And in an old-fashioned grate with hobs, a fire sparkled cheerfully,
for it was a cold gloomy afternoon.

Tea was laid on a table in front of the fire, and in a few moments the
dearest old woman in a frilled close-fitting cap and a spotless apron,
entered, bringing a teapot and a kettle, which she placed on the hob.

[Illustration]

She smiled at Rachel.

“The very image of her father, isn’t she, sir?” she remarked.

“Oh! Did you know Dad?” enquired Rachel, joyfully.

“Martha has known all my young friends,” said Mr. Sheston.

“Many’s the time your father has sat where you’re sitting now, my
dear,” the old woman continued. “He was no older than you then, and had
just your look.”

She went out of the room quietly, leaving Rachel much interested, and
glad to be in a place that Dad had once known well.

She would like to have asked all sorts of questions about her father
when he was a little boy, but, remembering his letter, she felt in some
curious way that it would be better not to do so.

Tea was a most cosy and delicious meal, but it was only after old
Martha had cleared the table and swept up the hearth that Rachel said
rather disappointedly—“Then we’re not going to the British Museum?”
Mr. Sheston smiled. “Not to-day. I’m going to tell you a story instead.
But first you’ll have to listen to a little lecture.” He took an atlas
from one of the book-shelves, and opened it on the table before her.
“The story I am going to tell you has something to do with Greece, and
in order that you may understand it better, I want you first to look
at this. It is a map of Europe as it was three thousand years ago,
showing the countries round the Mediterranean Sea. All the parts of the
countries that belonged to Greece in those days are coloured pink.”

Rachel looked, and saw many pink islands in the Mediterranean Sea, as
well as pink strips along the coast of Asia Minor, and even a pink tip
to the heel of Italy.

“The Greek people had a lot of land—only all scattered about,” she
remarked.

Mr. Sheston nodded.

“Like England, it was a little country owning a lot of land—‘scattered
about,’ as you say. Well now, these islands were the Greek colonies,
just as India and South Africa and Australia are our colonies. Again,
like the English, the Greeks were great colonists. They sent out their
people to live and build and work in places sometimes far distant
from the mother country. But now I want you to find on the map one
particular island-colony called _Rhodes_.”

“Here it is!” cried Rachel, in a minute, putting her finger on a
pink-coloured spot. “It’s a good long way from Greece,” she observed,
“and quite close to Asia Minor.”

“It belonged to Greece, however,” said Mr. Sheston, folding up the map.
“I only want you to remember its name, and where it is. Now come and
look at this statue.”

He got up, and Rachel followed him to a recess on which stood a
beautiful little figure of a god.

“That is a god called Phœbus Apollo,” said Mr. Sheston. “To the Greeks
he meant all the best things in the world—the sun, poetry, music,
wisdom and truth, and everything that is free and beautiful.”

“The gods they worshipped in Egypt and Babylon weren’t beautiful,” said
Rachel. “But this god _is_. He’s much better than the others.”

“Because the Greeks themselves were in some ways higher and better than
the Egyptians or the Babylonians. They were thinkers and artists, and
their minds were free. Therefore they were able to imagine beautiful
gods, and they became the greatest race of people that ever lived....
Do you remember the name of their chief city?”

“Athens,” answered Rachel, who was rather good at geography.

“Yes, Athens,” repeated Mr. Sheston, softly. “Wonderful Athens! Well,
now, my dear, I can begin my story, asking you to remember that Greece
had many colonies, peopled by Greeks whose general life was very much
like the life led by the citizens of Athens in the mother country. They
worshipped the same gods—Phœbus Apollo amongst them—and they were, in
fact, part of the Grecian Empire....”

He was silent for a minute or two, and the room was so quiet and
restful that Rachel had almost begun to feel pleasantly drowsy when
she heard his voice again. “What I am going to tell you, I once told
your father years ago in this very room, and he sat just where you are
sitting now,” he said. Before she had time to make a reply, he began
the story, and though his first words ought, as Rachel afterwards
reflected, to have been rather startling, they seemed perfectly
natural, for she was getting used to the idea that, as Dad said, Mr.
Sheston was “the _oldest_ man in the world.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“When I was a little boy, nearer three than two thousand years ago,
I lived in the island of Rhodes. You know where it is, because a
minute or two ago, you found it on the map, and saw it marked in the
Mediterranean Sea as an island some long way from Greece.

“In the map, it was nothing but a little blotch coloured pink, so it’s
not surprising if you have no idea what _I_ see, when I remember Rhodes
as I knew it nearly three thousand years ago. I’ll describe the vision
that rises before me now.

“First of all, my own home. It is a big white house with pillars at the
entrance, and a flat roof, standing in a garden full of roses that
slopes down almost to the harbour of the town of Rhodes. The harbour is
full of ships—our own, and those from Tyre and Athens and Smyrna, and
all the great seaports on the Mediterranean—ships with curious curved
sails, some of them purple and embroidered with strange devices.”

(“Like the ships from Tyre I saw at Babylon,” thought Rachel, though
she did not care to interrupt.)

“Beyond the great harbour with its crowded shipping and merchandise of
green and purple figs, heaps of dates, bales of fine muslin and linen,
chests—some full of spices, others of gold and ivory—lies the sea,
blue as the bluest sapphire, over which, going and coming from every
harbour of every country whose shores touched the Mediterranean, ships
go sailing. That is the picture I have in my mind when I think of
Rhodes as I knew it ages ago.

“My name in those days was Cleon, and I had a beautiful mother, and a
little sister called Penelope.

“But before I go on, I must tell you that by the time I came into the
world, Athens, our mother city, where my father had been born, was
no longer so great and powerful as it had been in the days a hundred
years before my time. All sorts of trouble had come to Greece. It had
been conquered by a certain king called Alexander the Great, who died
just before I was born, and all the time I was a child, the generals
of his army were quarrelling among themselves—each one trying to get
the largest share of all the great kingdoms their master King Alexander
had won. You will ask what that had to do with Rhodes, and with my
beautiful home, and with the happiness of everyone I loved. It had all
too much to do with us, as I will explain.

“Our island had indeed been conquered by Alexander the Great, but fifty
years before I was born we had regained our liberty, had become a
republic and also the greatest sea nation in the world. But now, though
the great conqueror himself was dead, one of his generals, jealous of
our power, determined to subdue us and make us slaves again. This man’s
name was Demetrius, and, because he had become so famous in war, he was
generally called Demetrius, the Besieger of Cities.

“I was twelve years old when the news came that this dreaded Demetrius
had declared war on Rhodes, and was coming to besiege us, and never
shall I forget the speech my father (who was Governor of Rhodes) made
to the citizens that day!

“‘We are Greeks,’ he said, ‘and worthy children of Athens, our mother
city. Never will we yield to Demetrius! Let us prepare for the greatest
siege that has ever been known.’

“A great shout answered him, and my father at once began to make
preparations.

“‘First of all,’ he said, ‘every useless person must be sent out of
Rhodes.’ That meant all the women and children, and all men who were
not strong enough to fight. For, in the long siege that was expected,
there would not be sufficient food for anyone but workmen and soldiers.
Workmen must instantly begin to make every sort of warlike weapon,
including machines as far as possible like those which Demetrius would
certainly employ against the city. Other workmen must strengthen its
walls, toiling day and night. Everyone in fact must labour as they had
never done before. I followed him from the marketplace that day full of
dread. If all the children were to go, should I have to leave Rhodes
just at this stirring time, when I so longed to be in the midst of
things? Yet I dared not ask my father to let me stay, for I knew I must
not trouble him with my affairs when he had the whole town’s business
on his mind. I was very miserable, for I knew he intended to send me,
with my mother and little sister, to Athens. But you shall hear how
it was that I after all remained in Rhodes through the whole dreadful
siege.

“One of our greatest friends was a certain young sculptor called
Chares. He was very fond of me, and deeply interested in a curious gift
which, even as a child, I possessed. My greatest amusement and interest
had always been to draw _plans_ of houses and towns, and I drew them
so correctly and well that everyone was amazed, for I had never been
taught. To _me_ there was nothing wonderful about this, for it seemed
quite easy, and I could never understand why Chares looked upon my work
with so much astonishment.

“As soon as I dared I began to beg and entreat not to be sent away,
till my father, growing angry, silenced me, and I was just creeping off
miserably when Chares, who was with us, spoke.

“He had picked up a plan of the town on which I had been working, and I
saw him studying it attentively, all the time I was begging to stay.

“‘Yield to the boy, Hippias,’ he exclaimed, suddenly. ‘Who knows that
this gift of his,’ he tapped the paper he held, ‘may not be of value? I
think he should remain with us.’

“My father looked from me to Chares, and, after a moment’s silence,
said quietly, and to my great joy, ‘So be it. That is’—turning to
me—he went on: ‘if you can bear hunger and even wounds perhaps, like a
man. We must have no whimpering children in Rhodes.’

“I felt I could bear anything if only I might remain, and I was
unspeakably grateful to my dear Chares for his interference. I knew my
father not only trusted him greatly, but also had an idea that he was
favoured by the gods, and could look into the future. It was because
_he_ pleaded for me that my wish was granted.

“In a few days I was the youngest person left in Rhodes, which was
now filled only with soldiers and workmen. Those were wonderful days
when we waited for the coming of the fleet that was to destroy us!
Almost every hour fresh troops were landed, for the countries that were
friendly to us sent us soldiers in plenty. Many of them were our own
countrymen—Greeks from other colonies, who rejoiced to fight with us,
and arrived shouting, singing, and full of delight. All day long I ran
here, there and everywhere in the town. Now I was down by the harbour
to see a fresh ship full of warriors come sailing in; now I walked
round the city walls to watch the workmen strengthening and repairing
them. But most time of all I spent in the sheds where the great war
engines were being built, for these fascinated me beyond measure, and
I wondered whether even the celebrated Demetrius had better or larger
ones than those we were making. I was soon to know.

“My father had brought me up to reverence the gods, and the chief god
of our worship was Phœbus Apollo—lord of the sun which poured its
light so gloriously upon our island, and ripened our grapes and figs,
and made the whole land lovely and pleasant to the sight.

“In our garden there was a little white marble temple, and in it, with
an altar in front, stood a beautiful statue of the god, made by our
friend, Chares, the sculptor. Here I often went to pray for victory.
One morning I woke before sunrise, and the loveliness of the sky made
me wish to worship the god of the approaching day.

“Like a vast mirror the scarcely heaving sea reflected the pink glow of
the sky, where little golden clouds like feathers floated just above
the horizon, and a broad band of amber was growing momentarily brighter.

“I rose quickly from my place on the roof, and, running past rooms
filled with sleeping soldiers (for our house had been turned into a
barracks), made my way into the garden all mysterious, dim and dewy in
the dawn.

“I crossed wet lawns, stopped to pick a handful of the roses that
poured in a crimson torrent from a stone urn, and then ran on to the
grove of lemon trees in which stood the temple.

“To my surprise I found someone there before me. A dark figure stood
within. Just at that moment, the first ray of the risen sun darted like
a golden arrow between the pillars of the temple, and the marble statue
of the god appeared bathed in dazzling light.

“The figure I had seen was now kneeling at the foot of the altar, and I
recognised Chares.

“Very softly I crept into the temple, and, dropping my roses on the
altar, knelt beside him.

“Then Chares rose to his feet, and stretching out his arms, prayed
aloud. His words, spoken in the Greek tongue, sounded like beautiful
poetry, but I can only give you in another and different language, a
poor idea of the prayer he offered to Phœbus Apollo.

“‘O mighty lord of the sun and of all the beauty in striving for which
men are raised above the beasts that perish, grant us victory in the
coming strife. I, Chares, thy worshipper, who have many times fashioned
in thine honour statues which but faintly show forth my dreams of thy
perfection, do make a vow before thee here, at the rising of the sun,
that, if to thy people of Rhodes comes the victory we crave, I will
raise to thy glory such a statue as never man yet beheld—the Wonder of
the World, an everlasting sign of thy mercy, the best and last work of
my hands.’

“The little temple was flooded with sunlight, and the heap of roses on
the altar was glowing like a crimson fire, when Chares turned, and,
seeing me beside him, laid his hand on my shoulder. We moved out of the
temple, and he was just going to speak when I pointed with a cry to the
horizon. Crowding sails were in sight, and Chares started. ‘They come!’
he exclaimed. ‘At what better moment than after my prayer and vow?’

“But, even before the last words were uttered, such a shout went up
from the harbour and the town as to make my heart beat and set me
trembling with excitement. From the house, across the lawns to the
gates which led to the seashore, the soldiers came rushing, and, in a
few moments, Rhodes was humming and buzzing like a hornet’s nest.

“So the famous siege of Rhodes began. You will read all about it when
you are older, for it was one of the most celebrated sieges in history.
To me, as to hundreds of others, it was a time which, though full of
excitement, was still more full of misery and sorrow. My dear father
was killed fighting bravely, and many, many of our friends.

“Months passed, and sometimes we won a victory, breaking through the
enemy forces, and sometimes Demetrius, with his terrible war machines,
triumphed. He had succeeded in landing on our island and was encamped
on a hill near our city, while _we_ within _our_ walls, resisted all
his efforts to break them down.

“After nine or ten months of fighting, our sailors won a splendid
victory against the fleet of Demetrius, and the temples of the gods
were crowded with worshippers giving thanks for our success.

“Since my father’s death, Chares had lived with me in our once
beautiful house (now a barracks for the soldiers), and he and I
preferred to worship in our own little private temple of Phœbus Apollo.
When we left it that day, the sun was setting, and the roses, which
during the war had grown in wild profusion, almost smothered the
shrine, and made it look as though set in the midst of scarlet flames.

“Chares glanced back at it, and put his hand on my shoulder.

“‘Cleon,’ he said, ‘if the statue I have in mind ever rises to the
honour of the god, it will be through _you_.’

“I was startled and impressed by his words which I did not understand.
How could I, still a child, and not even allowed to fight, have
anything to do with victory—if victory ever came? For we knew that
Demetrius had but retired to bring fresh forces against us. I began to
say something like this, but Chares paid no heed to my words.

“‘Are you keeping your drawings and plans in safety?’ he asked, as
though to change the subject. For he knew that my days now were chiefly
occupied in making plans of different parts of the city, and also
careful drawings of our own, as well as of the enemy’s war machines.
This I did to amuse myself, and often, though Chares did not know this,
ran into great danger in my eagerness to see something I thought useful
or important, more closely.

“‘How do you think this gift has come to you?’ asked Chares presently,
when I had assured him that I kept all my drawings.

“And when I said I had never thought about it, and did not consider it
a ‘gift,’ because to me it was like a kind of game, he replied gravely,

“‘Some day you will know.’

“We were not left long to enjoy our victory, for soon rumours began to
fly about which filled us with anxiety.

“Demetrius, beaten for the time, had indeed retired, but it was known
that he had invented, and was building, a new and a more terrible war
engine than had ever before been designed. By this time, in Rhodes, we
were nearly starving, for our food was almost all gone, and Phrynis,
our general, was full of anxiety, for though he did not doubt the
courage of our troops, he knew they could not fight if they were weak
for lack of nourishment. You may imagine his relief when, just at the
blackest moment of despair, some ships sent by our friend, the King of
Egypt, managed to get past the watching fleet of the enemy, laden with
corn, and, a few days afterwards, other ships arrived with fresh troops
to help our tired men.

“After they had rested and been well fed, Phrynis gave orders for
soldiers and sailors to prepare for the great machine which would
soon be at our gates, by building an _inner_ wall behind that which
encircled the city. To do this it was necessary to pull down a great
many houses, and, among them, my own beautiful home, and even the
little temple of Phœbus Apollo. Before this was done, we held a solemn
service within the temple, and again Chares renewed his vow to make the
statue, and begged forgiveness of the god for having to destroy one of
his dwelling-places. I thought my heart would break when instead of
the white house I knew and loved, with its marble columns, its flights
of marble steps leading to a garden beautiful as a dream, I saw waste
land, scattered over with stones and rubbish, all the roses trampled
under foot, and desolation far and wide about the new wall that was
rising. But we were fighting for our lives, and there was no time
either for sorrow or regret.

“Meanwhile, the war machine which Demetrius was preparing for our
destruction was nearly completed. It was being built upon that part of
the island already in possession of the enemy, and marvellous tales
about its size and deadliness were daily brought into the city by those
of our soldiers who had seen it. The name they said that was given to
the new engine was _helepolis_, which means _destroyer of cities_. As
time went on, I could think of nothing but this awful monster, which I
was quite sure _might_ be overcome if only one could think of the means.

“By now, so many were the plans I had made of our city that there was
scarcely a yard of it I did not know, and one day I said to Chares,

“‘If only we could discover to which point of the walls this
_helepolis_ will be brought when it begins its attack upon us.’

“Chares glanced at me quickly.

“‘Why?’ he asked.

“‘Because, if only I knew that, I should also know at once what to do.’

“I spoke with great confidence, for I was really quite sure of the plan
I had in mind—though _why_ I was so sure, I could not tell.

“Chares looked at me again, and then as though he had dismissed the
subject, said, ‘To-day I will take you where you may work at your maps
and plans in greater quiet.’

“Since the destruction of our house, another in the heart of the town
had become our General Headquarters, and here everything was crowded
and rough and noisy with the incessant tramping of soldiers about its
door, and there was no spot in it that I could call my own. So I was
glad that Chares had found a place for me, and, when after several
hours’ absence, he returned, I willingly followed him to a house on
the hill-side beyond the walls. We passed through a quiet garden and
presently entered a room, where, to my surprise, I saw our general
Phrynis, several other officers, and one or two men I knew to be
engineers. These men smiled in an amused way when I came in, and I
heard one whisper to another,

“‘Have we been brought here to consult with a child?’

“But Chares drew a stool up to the table in the window space, and told
me to open the ground plans of the city and the maps I had brought, and
when the men crowded round to see, I noticed that their faces altered
as they passed my drawings from one to the other in silence.

“At last Phrynis, who was very grave, spoke touching a point on one of
my plans of the town.

“‘Cleon,’ he said, ‘if the new war engine should be posted at _this_
part of the wall, what would you do supposing you had everything you
wanted at your command?’

“Then I began to explain very fast and confidently—(for it all seemed
quite simple to me)—just the way in which I would lay a mine under
that part of the wall, and just the spot where the engine would sink,
if certain directions were carried out.

“The men glanced at one another again in silence, and all at once
Phrynis rose. ‘The work begins to-night,’ I heard him say. ‘There is no
time to lose. Back to the city.’

“The soldiers clattered out, leaving me alone with Chares, who took my
hand and whispered hurriedly, ‘It is right you should know—though you
understand that no word must cross your lips. It is _there_, opposite
the place on the plan pointed out to you by Phrynis, that the machine
will be planted. This we have learnt through our spies. So important
is the secret that Phrynis would hold no meeting in the city itself,
and therefore have we come to this quiet place. You are to follow and
direct the work as soon as it grows dark.’

[Illustration]

“Can you at all imagine what a thrilling night that was for me when by
the light of torches I saw hundreds of men working under my direction?
At the time I was too preoccupied to wonder how it happened that I knew
exactly what to say and do. It seemed to me every now and then that I
had done and said the same things many times before and therefore need
not hesitate, nor even think. It was as though something was happening
in my sleep, quite easily and naturally.

“When the first streak of dawn was in the sky, the work was finished,
and, all at once worn out, I was almost carried by Chares to our
barracks, where I slept for hours. All the rest of that day we waited
in suspense, for, though we knew the war machine was ready, we were not
sure when the attack would be made.

“It came the next morning. Shouts and battle cries from the besiegers,
and terrific blasts from their trumpets were followed by flights of
arrows, as the huge monster moving towards us over the waste ground
beyond the walls drew near.

“I watched it, with my heart thumping. The ground already in the
possession of Demetrius had been levelled so that the ‘destroyer of
cities’ might move more easily, and I knew just where the mine would
strike it—if only we had not been deceived about the track over which
it was to pass!

“But suppose Demetrius had changed his plans? Or that the spies were
wrong? Suppose the machine should pass a shade too far on the right or
the left of the mine. It would then arrive safely beneath the wall, and
we should all, I thought, be destroyed. For never had I, or any of the
Rhodians, imagined such a monster as this!

“It was like a square castle upon wheels. Thousands of soldiers pushed
it forward, but their toil was made easier by the wheels or castors
which turned every way under the great frame supporting it. Nine
storeys I counted, with staircases leading up and down from one to the
other. The whole monster, half animal, half tower (as it looked), was
covered with iron plates like the scales on a serpent. In the front of
each storey there were little windows with leather curtains which moved
up and down, covering them—meant, no doubt, to break the force of the
stones and darts we should hurl in our defence. On it came, towering
above our walls, its windows like the awful eyes of some dragon,
glaring at its victims. As yet it had not begun to spit forth stones
and darts and flaming torches, but evidently it was only waiting for
this till it should be closer at hand, and more deadly in effect.

“While I held my breath in terror lest anything in my plan should go
wrong, I yet noticed with pride the spirit of our men who shouted
their battle-cries, and shot streams of arrows in return for those sent
over by the enemy foot-soldiers. Nearer and nearer came the monster—my
heart stood still—and then, just as I was feeling I must faint or
scream, with such a crash as to make the whole city totter, it suddenly
disappeared into the ground. _Almost_ disappeared, for only the topmost
and smallest storey was visible!

“At first it seemed as though the whole world had been suddenly struck
dumb. Not a sound was heard from either side, besiegers or besieged.
Then, after that moment of deathly silence a cry went up from the city
that was like nothing I ever heard. The next moment I felt the arms of
Chares catching me before I fell to the ground.

“The excitement and suspense had been too much for me, and when I
opened my eyes I was lying in our barracks, and Phrynis, Chares, and
crowds of other people, were waiting to embrace me, and call me the
saviour of our city.

“For the war had ended while I was unconscious. Phrynis afterwards
told me that messengers from many parts of Greece had for some days
past arrived at the camp of Demetrius, urging him to make peace with
us on our own terms. But he added: ‘It was the failure of his last and
greatest engine rather than the entreaties of his friends that decided
him to struggle no more for victory. The victory is ours, and we owe it
to you, Cleon, a child in years, but a man in genius.’

“Such praise as this might well have filled me with foolish pride and
vanity if I had not been quite sure that somehow or other I had been
_helped_. I had not thought out the plan at all. It had come ready-made
into my mind. But when I tried to explain this to Phrynis, he merely
laughed at what he called my modesty, and I could see he did not
understand. It was only Chares who understood, and made _me_ understand
also. But that came much later on, as I presently will tell you.

“Meanwhile everyone was mad with joy that the siege which had lasted
a whole year, and was the most wonderful and celebrated that had ever
happened, was over. Trumpets blew, bells rang, the city adorned with
flowers and crowded with rejoicing people gave itself up to festivity.

“But in all this triumph I had no share, for I was too ill and unhappy
to take any part in the victory rejoicings. Not only had excitement,
lack of food, and the long strain of the war injured my health but
sad news soon came to me from Athens, where my mother and sister were
living.

“Chares had taken me to live with him at his house in Lindus, a town in
the island not far from Rhodes, and there I heard that my mother was
dead. She was ill when tidings of my father’s death reached her, and
from the shock and grief of this news she never recovered. So the war
had robbed me of both my parents and separated me from my sister, to
whom some friend in Athens had offered a home.

“You may imagine that I was a very unhappy little boy in those first
days of victory, and it was not for a long time that I could bring
myself to take joy in the great work that lay before my friend, Chares.

“Almost as soon as the fighting ceased, he began the statue promised
to the god, Phœbus Apollo—that statue which became one of the Seven
Wonders of the World.

“To explain how such a statue as this, requiring enormous sums of money
and an enormous quantity of metal became possible to make, I must tell
you what happened after we made peace.

“Demetrius was a generous enemy, and just before withdrawing all his
troops from the island, he actually sent us all the very war machines
he had built for our destruction, saying that he could not sufficiently
admire our gallant defence! Now the materials of which these engines
were made were immensely valuable, and the citizens agreed to sell
them and to put the great sum of money they received for them at the
disposal of Chares.

“So Chares began his work, and for twelve long years I saw the famous
statue of the Sun-God growing under his hands in the open-air workshop
he used for his task.

“By the end of those twelve years I was, of course, a grown man. Many
things had happened. I had worked hard and was now a very famous
engineer, well known in all the islands of the Mediterranean. I had
caused my old home to be rebuilt, as well as the little temple to
Phœbus Apollo. I was married, and had little children of my own, who
played in the garden I had known as a boy. It was lovely as ever now,
for in that warm climate plants grow quickly, and once more it was full
of roses and fragrant with the scent of lemon groves.

“All this you must understand before I tell you what happened on the
evening of the day the great statue was finished.

“That evening Chares was my guest, and the next day was to be one
of special rejoicing. For not only was there high festival in the
city—because, at last, the statue was to be set up at the entrance to
the harbour—but it was also the marriage day of Chares and my sister,
Penelope, who had now come to live with us. By this time she was a
beautiful maiden of eighteen, and I was only too happy to think she was
to be the wife of my friend.

“Long after all the house was quiet that night, and everyone else
slept, Chares and I sat on the terrace that overlooked the sea, and
talked of the future and the past.

“‘Cleon,’ said Chares, after a silence, ‘have you no wonder about the
part you played in the siege, you being then but a child?’

“‘I have wondered, indeed, and I still wonder,’ I answered. ‘Often I
have seemed to be just about to understand the miracle of my knowledge
when I planned the overthrow of the war engine And a moment later I am
again confused.’

“‘Come!’ exclaimed Chares, after a silence. ‘Let us go to the temple in
the grove. It was there I made my vow to Phœbus Apollo, and it is just
that there I should return thanks on this, the happiest evening of my
life, when my work is at last finished.’

“We rose and walked across the moon-silvered lawn towards the little
temple gleaming white amidst the lemon trees.

“I can never forget the beauty of the night. We could hear the gently
murmuring sea where it lay under the moon, calm as a shining lake.

“The shadows of the trees lay motionless on the grass, and made a
lovely tracery upon the temple roof, and the air was full of sweet
scents. Once again, as when I was a boy, I picked a handful of roses,
and laid them on the altar at the feet of the statue, which, carefully
preserved during the war, stood once more on its marble pedestal. We
knelt before it, and Chares offered a strange prayer. From his words
I knew that he was praying to a _Spirit_, and that the statue before
which he prayed only represented one little idea (which was all we poor
human beings might understand) of some God greater than we could know,
or than any statue could suggest. His prayer ended, he turned to me,
and I saw him take something from the folds of his tunic. The moonlight
glittered on what I now saw to be a crystal ball which he put into my
hands.

“‘Look steadfastly within it,’ he said gravely. ‘Here, in this temple,
it may be, you will understand.’

[Illustration]

“Full of wonder, I began to gaze into the depths of the crystal, for
the moonlight was so bright that everything reflected in the ball
was plainly visible. At first I saw nothing but a little upside-down
picture of the temple itself, and the overhanging trees, but after
a moment this reflection melted away, and other scenes appeared,
dissolving and reappearing so rapidly that I could catch but a glimpse
of each. Then, all at once, a clear steady vision, upon which I looked
intently, took the place of these shifting ones. There were pyramids in
this scene, visible from the open door of a vast hall with sculptured
figures at the entrance. And in that hall I saw _myself_! But I was
not clothed in my ordinary linen tunic. I wore a strange robe, and a
still stranger head-dress, and I was bending over something that looked
like a plan of a building. For a moment I was puzzled, and altogether
confused—till in a flash I _remembered_, and as the truth came to me,
I gave a startled cry.

“Chares was looking at me with a smile as I raised my head.

“‘I was Sheshà—chief engineer and architect among the priests of
Egypt, long ages ago,’ I exclaimed.

“‘Do you understand now why you were able to plan that mine, and save
our city?’ asked Chares quietly. ‘It was knowledge you had already
gained in another far-away life, though you were ignorant whence it
came, and why the work was easy to you.’

“I was struck dumb with wonder, for not only did I remember my life as
Sheshà, but fragments of many other lives since then began to come back
to me, some vividly, some only as a sort of confused dream.

“But Chares put his hand on my arm and led me out of the temple.

“‘Leave your memories now, and let us go in and sleep,’ he said. ‘See,
a new day has begun—the greatest day for me in this my present life.’
He pointed to the east, where the first grey streaks of dawn were
visible, and I followed him into the house. So for the first time I
_remembered_. There have been many, many lives since, and in some of
them I again forgot all that had gone before. But, once more now, the
old man you know as ‘Mr. Sheston,’ remembers again, otherwise he would
not be telling you this story—which is nearly at an end.

“When the sun rose we were awakened by the sound of trumpets, the
clashing of bells and the shouting of the workmen who were dragging the
huge brazen figure on its wheeled platform from the workshop. Later on
in the morning, came the procession through the city, where Chares led
my beautiful sister up to the great temple. Children strewed flowers
before them as they passed through shouting multitudes, praising Chares
and showering blessings upon him and his newly made bride.

[Illustration: ‘IT WILL LAST FOR EVER’]

“By sundown, hundreds of workmen working with a will had set up the
statue, on a pedestal at the entrance to the harbour, and now crowds of
the citizens took ship, to view it from the sea.

“In a gorgeously painted barge, all my household, with Chares and my
sister in the places of honour, floated out of the harbour, and we
turned to gaze at the wonderful figure. It flashed and glittered in
the light of the setting sun, as though the god thus by a gracious
sign accepted the gift. A mighty and beautiful figure it was, towering
against the sky; a giant in bronze, proud, stately and awe-inspiring—a
fit memorial of the famous siege of Rhodes. Well might it become, as it
did, one of the Seven Wonders of the World.

“‘It will last for ever—like the Pyramids!’ I whispered to Chares as I
took his hand.

“Little did any of us know that it would last little longer than one
lifetime. In eighty years that marvellous statue was a heap of ruins. A
great earthquake, which shook Rhodes to its foundations, shattered it
also to fragments, and only a memory of one of the most famous statues
in the world remained. And even that memory faded and grew false, for
legends gathered about the celebrated ‘Colossus of Rhodes,’ and men
actually believed that it had stood astride the harbour and that ships
in full sail passed under its huge body as under an arch.

“This could only have been thought possible by men who had forgotten,
or never knew, the beautiful Greek sculpture. Never could a Greek
artist have made a figure ugly and grotesque as this would have been,
if later descriptions had been true. And I who saw the statue daily,
smile when, sometimes even in these days, I read such a description of
it in books of history. Chares was a true artist, and his simple, noble
statue was worthy of him, and worthy of its fame as one of the World’s
Seven Wonders.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Sheston’s voice died away, and at this moment Martha came in with a
lamp; the room was all at once lighted up, and the old man glanced at
the clock.

“I must take you back at once,” he said. “Aunt Hester will be getting
anxious.”

He rose quickly, and Rachel knew without being told that she mustn’t
ask him any questions. He had become the kind, ordinary old gentleman
he seemed to most people—not at all the same person who in the
firelight had looked so mysterious and had told her the whole long
story to which she had just listened, as though he were reading it from
a book!

As she lay in bed that night, Rachel’s mind was full of the great
statue and the great siege, and in imagination she saw the sun-god
proudly guarding the harbour of “Cleon’s” brave island.

“I _do_ wish there hadn’t been an earthquake,” was her waking
reflection.

[Illustration]




FOURTH WONDER

[Illustration: THE TEMPLE OF DIANA]


Lessons always began for Rachel with a chapter in the Bible which she
read to Miss Moore. She was allowed to choose her own chapter, and one
morning, as she opened her Bible at random, the word _Ephesus_ struck
her. She wondered why this name immediately reminded her of Mr. Sheston
and the story of Rhodes, for at first they seemed to have nothing to
do with one another. Then she remembered that on the map—(why it was
actually _seven_ days ago since he had shown her that map)—she had
seen the town _Ephesus_ marked on the coast of Asia Minor.

“Shall I read this? It’s the nineteenth chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles,” she asked suddenly, addressing her governess.

“Very well,” agreed Miss Moore.

So Rachel began to read how St. Paul, having come to Ephesus to preach
Christianity, had roused the anger of a certain silversmith, Demetrius
by name, who “made silver shrines for Diana.” This man, as it appeared
from the story, was greatly afraid of losing his trade, because so many
people were becoming Christians that no one, he thought, would care any
more for the silver shrines. He therefore tried to stir up the citizens
against St. Paul and his teaching, by calling together a great crowd
of people, to whom he declared that all the silversmiths and workmen
would suffer through this new religion of Christianity. “_So that not
only this our craft is in danger to be set at naught_,” he said, “_but
also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised,
and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world
worshippeth_.”

Rachel read this with interest, for she had actually _seen_ some of the
temples built thousands of years ago, in honour of certain gods, and
she guessed that the temple for a goddess, “whom all Asia and the world
worshippeth” must have been particularly magnificent. She went on to
the next verse, which showed that Demetrius had succeeded in rousing
the people to defend their old worship: “_And when they heard these
sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, ‘Great is
Diana of the Ephesians.’ And the whole city was filled with confusion
... some therefore cried one thing and some another: for the assembly
was confused, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come
together._”

Then the story went on to relate how a man called Alexander tried to
speak to the clamouring people, and could not make himself heard for
the noise, for “_all with one voice about the space of two hours cried
out ‘Great is Diana of the Ephesians.’_”

Thanks to Mr. Sheston’s story of Rhodes, and thanks also to her own
strange magical journeys, Rachel had some sort of picture in her mind
of the scene described in the Bible.

Ephesus was not so very far from Rhodes, and it was on the coast. There
must then, have been a deep blue sky above that temple round which
the people shouted “_Great is Diana of the Ephesians_,” and dazzling
sunshine, and a glimpse of wonderful blue sea!

Before Rachel had finished the chapter she had made up her mind to
ask Mr. Sheston about Diana of the Ephesians. She liked the name very
much, and it certainly sounded as though something interesting—perhaps
_exciting_ might be connected with it. Suppose it should even lead to
an “adventure”? She scarcely dared to hope for this, but all the same
there _was_ a little hope at the back of her mind.

Anyhow, there was something, though of a different nature, to look
forward to this very afternoon, for a little girl was coming to tea.

“She’s the daughter of an artist I happened to meet the other day,”
Aunt Hester had explained at breakfast time. “He turned out to be a
friend of your father’s, and, when he heard you were here, he said
he would like his little girl to meet you, so I invited her to come
to-day.”

“What is her name?” had been Rachel’s first question.

“I don’t know. I forgot to ask. But she’s about your age. She’s coming
early, so you needn’t do any lessons this afternoon.”

This in itself was good news, and by three o’clock Rachel was looking
out of the window for the expected visitor. But after all, when the
bell rang she was too late to see who was admitted, because for the
third or fourth time, she had moved across the room to the mantelpiece,
to look at the watch which lay there.

Aunt Hester opened the door.

“Here is Diana,” she said. “I shall leave you together to amuse
yourselves till tea time.”

“Oh, is your name really _Diana_?” exclaimed Rachel, forgetting to
shake hands. “How funny!”

“Why is it funny?” enquired the little girl, not unnaturally, while
Rachel swiftly looked her up and down.

She scarcely knew whether to think her very pretty, or only
curious-looking. She had a mop of red hair, big eyes, more green than
blue, and a little pointed face which reminded Rachel of the faces
of certain elves in an illustrated fairy-tale book she possessed.
Certainly she was rather like an elf altogether, light and slender,
with quick darting movements.

“Why is it funny?” she repeated. And, when she laughed, Rachel was
quite sure she was pretty, as well as curious.

“Only because I was reading about Diana in the Bible this morning—and
I liked the name.”

“It’s the name of a goddess,” her visitor announced rather importantly.

“I know. ‘Diana of the Ephesians.’”

The little girl looked puzzled. “I don’t know anything about the—what
did you say? Ephe—something? I was called _Diana_ because my father
was painting a picture of her when I was born.”

“What was it like?”

“Oh, it’s a lovely picture. She’s a girl running through a wood, and
she has a bow and arrows in her hand. And she’s dressed in a short
white thing—a tunic, you know, that comes to her knees. And her hair
in father’s picture is red, like mine, and there’s a little moon, a
tiny crescent moon, just over her forehead. And running behind her
there are some other girls who are hunting with her. Father told me
all about her the other day, because, you see, as I’ve got her name, I
wanted to know.”

“Tell me,” Rachel urged.

“Well, the Greek people worshipped her, father said. She was the twin
sister of Apollo——”

“I know about _him_,” interrupted Rachel eagerly. “Phœbus Apollo. He
was the Sun-God.”

“Well, Diana was the _moon_-goddess. I suppose that’s because she was
his twin sister? Sun and moon, you know. But, anyhow, she was the
goddess of hunting as well. And she loved to be free and live out of
doors in the woods. So do I—that’s why I’m glad my name’s Diana, like
hers. And her father, Jupiter, let her be free, and gave her some girls
called nymphs, to be her companions, and hunt with her in the woods and
on the mountains.... I think the Greek people had awfully nice gods and
goddesses, don’t you?”

“Awfully nice,” agreed Rachel. She was thinking of the little white
temple to Phœbus Apollo in “Cleon’s” beautiful garden, and of the great
statue at Rhodes. She glanced at Diana, who was perched like an elf
on the corner of the table, swinging her feet. How splendid it would
be if she could tell her—well, all sorts of things. But would she
understand? Wouldn’t she laugh and say, “You’ve just made them up!”
Again Rachel glanced at her visitor. She looked as though she _might_
understand. There was something about her—But she determined to be
very cautious.

“When’s your birthday?” she began suddenly.

“The seventh of May. When’s yours?”

“The seventh of June.” Rachel found herself growing excited. This was a
promising beginning.

“How many brothers and sisters have you got?”

“Six.”

“Then you’re the seventh child?” Rachel held her breath now.

“Yes. And I’m the youngest.”

“So am I. And is your father the seventh child in his family?” She
scarcely dared to put the question.

Diana laughed, and began counting on her fingers. “Let me see—Uncle
John, Aunt Margaret.... And there was Aunt May, but she died, and then
Uncle Dick.... And then.... Yes, he _is_. I never thought about it
before. What made _you_ think of it?” Diana seemed much amused, but
Rachel was desperately serious.

“Wait a minute,” she urged, “and perhaps I’ll tell you.”

The next “minute” was occupied in putting breathless questions to Diana.

“Yes!” she exclaimed at last. “You’re just as much mixed up with
_sevens_ as I am. Oh, isn’t it perfectly _wonderful_ that I’ve actually
found someone as lucky as I am? I shall have to tell Mr. Sheston....
But perhaps he knows. I shouldn’t be a bit surprised if he had
something to do with getting us to meet each other. You see he——”

But Diana’s mystified face checked Rachel in the midst of her excited
chattering.

“Of course you don’t understand anything about it yet,” she exclaimed.
“How stupid I am. I shall have to tell you everything from the
beginning.”

So she began the story of her first visit to the Museum, of the little
old man who had spoken to her there, of the mysterious seven times
bowing before the Rosetta Stone, and of all the marvels that had since
happened.

And as she talked, explaining and describing, she saw Diana beginning
to “understand.” Her eyes grew bright with eagerness, and, when at
last Rachel paused for breath, she slipped from the table and began to
dance about the room in her delight and excitement.

“I knew something like that might happen if only I could find out the
way to make it,” she cried. “Because, do you know, Rachel, I often have
dreams that are quite _real_—just as real as this room, and you, and
the tables and chairs are now. In those sorts of dreams I go to places
I’ve never seen in my life. Funny places where everything’s quite
different. People wear different clothes, and don’t talk English—and
yet I understand what they say. But I’m only there for a minute before
I come back again to my own bed and my own bedroom. And then I’m most
_awfully_ disappointed because I’m always quite sure that there’s
a way of making the dream _last_, so that I can go on, and have
adventures—instead of only seeing things in a sort of flash, you know.”

“Mr. Sheston can make them last—if they _are_ dreams!” Rachel
declared. “I have to call him ‘Mr. Sheston’ here,” she added. “But he’s
really Sheshà and Cleon, and I expect ever so many other people as
well. And yet all the _same_ person, you understand. In this life he
just happens to be Mr. Sheston, that’s all.”

“Oh, I _do_ wish I could see him,” sighed Diana.

She had scarcely spoken before her wish was granted, for at the last
word the door opened, and Mr. Sheston came in.

Rachel gave a shriek of delight, and seizing Diana’s hand, dragged her
to meet him.

“This is Diana. She’s the seventh child of the seventh child, and she
was born on the seventh of May, and everything that happens to her has
_sevens_ in it, and she has dreams, and—” Rachel tripped over her
words in her excitement, and Mr. Sheston laughed.

“Your Aunt Hester told me to walk up,” he said in an ordinary everyday
voice. “So this is Diana? How do you do, Diana?” He shook hands with
her, and turned to Rachel. “I came to see whether you felt inclined for
the Museum this afternoon. But as you have a friend with you—perhaps
another time?”

Diana gave a little gasp, and grew very pink, but seemed too shy to
speak.

But Rachel, who had seen a twinkle in Mr. Sheston’s eyes, laughed
happily.

“It’s just what Diana wants more than _anything_. Oh, do let’s put on
our things at once.”

She was running to the door when the old gentleman stopped her.

“Plenty of time. Plenty of time,” he said quietly. “Haven’t you yet
learnt that ‘time’ is as ‘magic’ as most other things? What have you
two been talking about?”

The children glanced at one another.

“I was telling her all about it,” said Rachel. “About the Pyramid,
you know, and Babylon, and the statue at Rhodes. I wouldn’t have told
anyone else, but when I found that she was a ‘seven’ girl too——”

“But before that?” interrupted Mr. Sheston, settling himself
comfortably into an arm-chair.

“We were talking about Diana,” said the other Diana. “It’s my name, and
Rachel had been reading about her in the Bible. And my father painted a
picture of her, so she was asking me about it.”

“Well,” returned Mr. Sheston, “let’s go on talking about Diana, because
there’s a great deal to say. There was a famous temple built for her
once upon a time, wasn’t there? Where was it?”

“At Ephesus,” said Rachel promptly.

“And where is Ephesus?”

“In Asia Minor,” answered Rachel again. “By the sea. Not so very far
from Rhodes,” she added, with a meaning glance.

Mr. Sheston got up, and to the children’s surprise, altered the
position of his arm-chair till it faced the window. Then he fetched two
other chairs, and placed one on either side of his own seat. This done,
he took from his coat pocket a leather case, and out of the case drew a
photograph. Then he pointed to the two small chairs on either side of
the big one.

“Sit down, one on each side of me,” he said.

When the children, too interested and puzzled to ask questions, had
done as he directed, he held the picture in such a position that both
of them could see what it represented.

“Is it the temple of Diana?” ventured Rachel as she glanced at the
photograph of a huge building.

“Well, not the picture of the temple itself, because that has ceased
to exist, and lies buried under ruins. But it’s a picture of what
scholars think the temple must have been like when it was standing....
And they’re not very far out,” he added. But this he murmured as though
to himself, as he again rose and walked towards the window. Rachel and
Diana watched him breathlessly while he propped the photograph against
the rim of one of the glass panes. After this had been successfully
accomplished, he returned to his seat, and looking from one little girl
to the other, said, “Stand up. Close your eyes. Bow seven times in the
direction of the picture.”

The children exchanged glances before they obeyed.

[Illustration]

“Open your eyes.” These were the next words—and they were necessary,
for till they were spoken, both of them felt all at once so drowsy that
they had no wish to raise their eyelids.

At the command, however, four eyes flew open in eager expectation—of
what, their owners scarcely knew. The scene they actually beheld was
surprising enough to force a little scream of astonishment from both of
them—even though Rachel, who had been through “adventures” before,
guessed at fresh wonders to follow.

The square-paned window, with its prospect of a road along which
omnibuses, carts and cabs travelled, and people went to and fro, had
vanished. They were looking into the open air.

       *       *       *       *       *

A mist like a shimmering white veil obscured everything but the sky,
which was intensely blue, and though the children strained their eyes,
they could discern nothing beyond, except, perhaps, something that
might, or might not, be trees. They were just vague shapes behind the
soft wall of mist.

“You shall see more than this in a moment.”

Mr. Sheston’s voice was close to them, but as Rachel and Diana turned
their heads to look at him they found that neither he nor anything
within the room was visible. It was as though they sat in a darkened
theatre looking out upon a stage. “And the curtain hasn’t gone up
properly yet,” thought Rachel, full of tremulous anticipation.

“I’ll tell you why the curtain hasn’t gone up yet,” Mr. Sheston’s voice
continued, and Rachel gave a little jump of surprise—for she had not
spoken her thought aloud. Oh, certainly, as Salome in Babylon had said,
Sheshà was “the greatest of all magicians!”

“You will understand presently how Diana’s temple at Ephesus began,”
Mr. Sheston went on. “What I am going to tell you now is _legend_—that
is to say, something that has been repeated from father to son for
a great many years, always altered a little in the telling, so that
though there may be, and probably is, some truth in the story, we can’t
say how much is true and how much false. Well, the _legend_ part of
the story, you see, is rather like the mist full of vague shapes which
you’re looking at now. I’m going to _tell_ you the legend part—but,
directly we come to what we really _know_, the curtain will go up.

“Once upon a time, then, in the country we now call Asia Minor, the
women were taught (or perhaps taught themselves) to do all the hard and
all the fierce work generally done by men. The little girls learnt
to hurl spears called javelins, and to shoot with bow and arrows, and
when they grew up were brave fighters. They also tilled the ground,
and gathered the harvest, and built houses, and in fact did everything
of that sort as well as men. They were called Amazons, and even great
men-warriors found them powerful enemies. According to the old story
it was they—these Amazons—who founded the city of Ephesus. That is,
they were the first people to cultivate the land and to build houses
where the magnificent city of Ephesus afterwards stood. It was these
strange and wonderful women who first worshipped Diana in the woods
and groves near the dwelling-places they had built. And it was quite
natural they should worship the sort of goddess they imagined, for all
wild life was her kingdom. So the Amazons, being themselves huntresses
and fighters, loved and reverenced her. Forest creatures like the deer
and wild boars belonged to her as the goddess of hunting, and she was
also the protectress of all young human creatures—girls as well as
boys. Thus, even in times so far away that there is no real history
about them, there were altars where Diana was worshipped, and, legend
tells us, the first altars set up in her honour were in, or near, the
city of Ephesus, founded by the Amazons. At first these were very
simple altars, for neither men—nor even women—had yet learnt to build
temples.

“In a moment the mist-curtain will go up, and you shall see the sort of
altar that once stood, where, afterwards, temples were built, and at
last that most splendid one of all, which was called a Wonder of the
World.” ... Mr. Sheston paused.

“We have done with legend now,” he went on after a moment, “and all you
will see is what has actually happened in the past.”

Neither of the children spoke, but they watched in breathless suspense
to see the curtain of mist shake and begin slowly to dissolve. First,
tall pointed trees began to prick through the fog, then a glimpse of
blue sky became visible. Next there was a gleam of sunshine on low
white roofs, and at last, clear and distinct, a lovely country lay
spread out before their eyes. They seemed to be looking at it as one
might sit on a terrace overhanging a wide view, yet close enough to
the nearer trees as almost to be able to touch them. Warm air in gentle
puffs flowed towards them, and the sun was hot upon their faces and
hands.

[Illustration: A LITTLE BOY WALKED IN FRONT OF THE PROCESSION]

They saw in the distance a cluster of simple houses between trees,
which Rachel guessed rightly to be the earliest city of Ephesus. Beyond
these houses, lay the deeply blue sea, stretching away, away towards
the distant shores of Greece opposite, with here and there a rocky
island set in the blue. The land between the sea and the point nearest
to them, was all hill and dale—the hills covered with stiff cypress
trees like dark torches against the sky, mingled with graceful smaller
and lighter trees. But just in front, and quite close, there was an
open glade, and in the midst of it an altar made of piled-up stones.
The altar was overshadowed by a big tree, and hanging from the lowest
branch the children could see a little figure carved very roughly in
wood.

Just as they noticed this, the sound of faint music—so faint, so
remote that they could only hear it because of the absolute stillness,
made them look quickly to the left of the altar. There, at a little
distance, between the trees they saw approaching a company of women
and children. The smaller children were almost naked, and their tiny
bodies showed white against the dark background of the wood. The women
wore short tunics with strips of leather bound in a criss-cross fashion
round their bare legs. A little boy, with nothing but the skin of
some wild animal hanging from his shoulders, walked in front of the
procession, proudly blowing into a small pipe made of a hollow reed.
The other children also had reed-pipes in their hands, and most of them
carried armfuls of poppies. They crossed the glade and gathered in
front of the altar upon which the women as well as the children began
to scatter the poppies.

For a long minute Rachel and Diana watched the little scene, scarcely
daring to breathe, in case it should vanish before their eyes. Then it
_did_ vanish! Blue sea, blue sky, hills and valleys, the small town in
the distance, the glade with its altar, the group of people about it
with their flowers, were all swallowed up in the white mist.

The children, spellbound and silent, while the beautiful scene lasted,
now found their tongues loosened.

“Oh, what a _darling_ little boy—the one with the fur over his
shoulders,” exclaimed Diana. “Oh, how lovely the sea looked, and
the blue sky, and the woods!” cried Rachel, excitedly. “And didn’t
the children look pretty bringing their flowers? But they were all
_poppies_. Why did they all bring poppies?”

“Because the poppy was the flower sacred to Diana. Nearly all the gods
and goddesses of Greece and the Greek colonies had flowers, as well as
animals that were specially theirs. And poppies belonged to the goddess
Diana. But now, if you want to see anything more, you mustn’t speak
again.”

The children subsided at once into silence, and Mr. Sheston went on
talking.

“You noticed the little naked boy who led the procession to the altar
in the glade? Keep him in mind, for it was _he_ who built the first
real temple to Diana. Listen, and I will tell you all I know about him.

“He was called Dinocrates, and his home was in Ephesus (you saw the
town in the distance, a mile or two from the glade). At the time when
Dinocrates was young, the city was small, the wild country stretched up
close to its walls, and the boy lived nearly all day long in the open
air.

“His father taught him to hunt, and he learnt so quickly to hurl the
javelin and to shoot with bow and arrows, that everyone said he was
specially favoured by Diana. The belief that the goddess was watching
over him made Dinocrates, even as a tiny boy, very happy, and filled
him with courage so that he was always successful in the chase,
and even grown-up men marvelled at his wonderful skill. It was so
well-known that he was a child greatly loved by Diana that whenever
there was a festival in her honour, Dinocrates was always chosen to
lead the procession, and to be the first to place his offerings of
poppies on her altar. And later, when he was a little older, he was
allowed to sacrifice in her honour an animal he had killed in the
chase. So the boy grew up with a great love and reverence for Diana,
and a longing to serve her in some special way that would shew his
gratitude for her protection. He soon grew dissatisfied with the altar
of stones, and the rough image on the trunk of her sacred tree, and
in secret dreamt of some dwelling worthy of the goddess, which should
_last_, and not be liable to destruction like the loosely built altar
and the image exposed to the air.

“As time went on, he found that skill in hunting was not his only
gift. He liked to plan houses, and he soon began to plan better ones
than had ever been built before. By the time he was a man, he was the
most famous architect in Ephesus, and many new buildings in the city
began to rise, designed by him. But the dream of his life was to build
a dwelling-place for his special goddess on the very spot where as a
child, with other children, he had worshipped her out of doors under
the sacred tree.

“It must be a real temple, and a temple different from, and better in
every way than any of the attempts yet made by other men to fashion
dwelling-places for the gods. So he worked and thought and imagined,
and at last a little marble building, supported by pillars different
from any other pillars yet designed, actually covered the spot of the
original altar.

“The day his temple was finished was the happiest day of his life.
There was a great festival, and from the city, crowds of people had
come to worship Diana for the first time under a roof, and to gaze at
the building itself. Small and simple, it was yet the most wonderful
they had ever seen, with its columns of an entirely new shape, and its
marble porch. And everyone was loud in the praise of its architect.

[Illustration]

“That night, Dinocrates was too happy to sleep. He lay thinking of the
temple which had been his life work, till suddenly a great desire to
see it again swept over him. So he got up, dressed, and began to walk
quickly in its direction. In half an hour he reached the glade in the
heart of which stood the temple, and before long he saw it gleaming
through the encircling trees. Dinocrates stopped short in delight at
the beauty of the scene. There was a full moon, and its silver light
poured down upon the little white building and made it dazzling to
behold. Graceful shadows from the trees trembled upon its roof, and
lay in long bars across the grass, and in the deep silence he could
hear his heart beating. All at once, another sound made him start—the
sound of a horn coming from far away, very faint and sweet! And then,
scarcely trusting his eyes, he saw in the distance through the misty
avenues of trees, white forms moving. They came nearer, rushing over
the grass as though blown softly by an invisible wind, and through the
silvery haze he caught a glimpse of white arms, and beautiful faces,
and of one face more lovely than the rest, with cloudy hair in which
something in shape like a crescent moon, sparkled and shone.

“For a second he saw the forms of beautiful women sweeping up the steps
towards the door of the temple, and then the vision disappeared. There
was only the moonlight on the grass, and the shadows, and silence.

“‘The goddess herself takes possession of her temple,’ thought
Dinocrates. ‘And mortals cannot see the gods and live.’

“He felt so happy, and yet so tired, that he sank down before the
temple to rest, and the glade was all full of sunshine before the
people who had come to look for him found him lying there, and saw that
he was dead....”

“Oh,” whispered Diana after a moment, “that’s an awfully sad story.”

“No,” said Rachel’s voice on the other side of Mr. Sheston’s arm-chair.
“Not really. Because he came back again. In another life, you know.
You’ll see in a minute. She _will_ see him again, won’t she?” In the
darkness Rachel turned towards Mr. Sheston.

“The story isn’t finished yet,” he replied. “Let me go on with it.

“Dinocrates died in _that_ life, as Rachel says, and hundreds of years
passed. That first temple with the columns of a new shape was at last
destroyed by fire, and a new temple took its place, much larger,
much more splendid, as you will see in a moment. But the architect
who planned the second building copied those pillars invented by
Dinocrates, so though his temple had been destroyed, his work you
understand, in a way, went on. Now you are going to see that _second_
temple, still on the same place or _site_, as it is called, of the
first altar in the glade. And you shall see Dinocrates also—again
as a little boy. Before you see him, however, I may tell you that he
doesn’t remember anything about himself or his life many years before.
Remember that hundreds of years have passed between the life-time of
those simple people you have just seen and the people you are going
to see now. Even _they_ lived six hundred years before the birth of
Christ. But, as you will discover, they had already learnt to make
wonderful buildings.

“Shut your eyes again. Bow seven times—and many years will have gone
by.”

The white mist was again dissolving when the children opened their eyes
and looked eagerly to see what changes had taken place during the time
that had magically flown.

Unaltered were the blue sky and the blue sea; unaltered the hills,
unaltered many of the woods, though some of them had been cut down and
houses and gardens had taken their place. The little white town in the
distance, however, had grown into a large city, whose houses were now
big and imposing. But the greatest change of all had taken place in
what was once the glade and then (though they had not actually seen it)
the first small temple.

A white marble building, covering a great stretch of ground, now rose
in front of the children—a beautiful temple with arcades of lofty
pillars wonderfully carved, and thronging upon the steps leading to
the wide open doors was a multitude of people. They were gracefully
clothed—the men in tunics, with long cloaks drooping from their
shoulders, the women in robes falling in folds to their sandalled feet.

But the attention of Rachel and Diana was at once directed towards a
group for whom everyone on the steps of the temple made way.

A little boy dressed in a short white tunic, his silky hair falling on
either side of his face, walked at the head of a procession towards the
temple gates. Behind him, richly dressed, followed his parents, and a
train of attendants and slaves.

He was evidently the son of some great nobleman, and, as he passed,
the crowd pressed forward, and men and women looked over one another’s
shoulders for a glimpse of the pretty child who walked so composedly
alone. And then the temple, brilliant in the sunshine, the crowd on
its steps, the blue sky and the blue sea in the distance, disappeared
in a flash. But even before the watching children could utter a cry of
disappointment, they found themselves, to their amazement and delight,
actually _inside_ the building, and quite close to an altar before
which stood the little boy and his parents. The sound of chanting
voices echoed through the temple, on the marble floor of which the
sunshine fell. Sweet scents floated in the air from burning incense,
and presently a priest, dressed in a rich robe, came from the altar,
followed by attendant priests.

[Illustration]

One of these approached the boy, and with a pair of curiously shaped
shears, cut off his beautiful silky hair, letting it fall on to a
silver platter, held by a priestess. Lifting the platter aloft in both
hands the priestess moved slowly to the altar, upon which she placed
it, and then all the great company in the temple bowed themselves to
the ground and worshipped. The little boy—now with close-cropped
hair, and evidently proud and satisfied—was being led back towards
the entrance door, when all at once he stopped and gazed about him as
though he recognized something, and could scarcely believe his eyes.

Diana and Rachel, who followed him, saw him point eagerly to a row of
pillars, and then turn to his parents saying something at which they
smiled.

One second they saw his dark puzzled eyes—the next they themselves
were out of the temple and seated as before, one on either side of Mr.
Sheston.

The white mist blotted out everything in front of the window.

“That was Dinocrates. He had come back after hundreds of years, hadn’t
he?” cried Rachel.

“Oh, do explain about him,” begged Diana. “Why did he point to the
columns like that? Why did he have his hair cut off? What is he going
to do now?”

Mr. Sheston laughed softly. “I’ll take one question at a time,” he
began.

But it was Rachel who answered the first question after all.

“I know, I know,” she exclaimed. “When he looked at the pillars he was
sort of _remembering_, wasn’t he? Remembering that a long time ago he
made something like them.”

“Yes, that’s a good guess. He was. He felt that somehow or other he was
as you say, ‘mixed up’ with that temple.”

“And about his hair?” enquired Diana.

“Well, that was just a ceremony, meaning that he was dedicated to, or
put under the special protection of the goddess. Boys at a certain
age had their hair cut off and offered to Diana in the temple to show
that they were her worshippers. And in the case of Dinocrates this was
especially true, for he became, perhaps, the most celebrated of the
worshippers of Diana.

“Now let me go on with the story.

“Again, as in the life he had lived about three hundred years before,
he became, when he grew up, a most famous architect, and again,
strangely enough, he built another temple to Diana. The temple you have
just seen, famous throughout the world for its beauty, after standing
about three hundred years, was set on fire one night by a madman, and
burnt to the ground; just as the still earlier temple had been burnt.

“Two memorable things indeed happened on that night, for while the fire
was raging in the temple just outside Ephesus, a baby was born, who
lived to be the greatest conqueror in the world. His name was Alexander
the Great—and Rachel has already heard something about him.

“But to return to the story. So great was the grief and horror of
the people of Ephesus at the loss of their temple that they at once
determined to set about another and still more magnificent one, greater
and more splendid than any other in existence. And of this last
temple—which became one of the Seven Wonders of the World—Dinocrates
was appointed to be the architect.

“Now you might easily think that Dinocrates ought to have been the
happiest man in the world to be allowed to build just the way he
pleased, and with enormous riches at his disposal, a temple that
should be worthy of the goddess he worshipped—the lovely Diana, the
moonlight queen of the chase, the friend of children. And certainly,
if _this_ had been the Diana for whom he worked, he would have been
happy indeed. But what kind of image do you think was to stand in the
midst of the magnificent temple when at last it should be built? No
statue of the graceful Diana _he_ knew, with her short tunic blowing
back in the breeze, and the crescent moon on her white forehead. The
Diana now worshipped by the Ephesians was nothing but a monstrous black
idol, scarcely like a woman at all! She was an enormous figure carved
in ebony, with great towers upon her head, and a body hideously and
grotesquely shaped!

“Hundreds and hundreds of years, you see, had passed since the true,
lovely Diana had been worshipped under the trees or in early temples,
and people had forgotten her—or rather they had perhaps confused
the idea of her in their minds with other quite different goddesses
belonging to Egypt. In any case, though they still kept her name,
_this_ was the Diana now adored by the Ephesians; this gigantic hideous
idol which the people believed had fallen from heaven, sent down to
them by Jupiter, the chief of all the gods! This ugly idol was the
precious figure saved from the fire, for which Dinocrates was asked to
build the most splendid temple in the world!

“Well, he built it. But all the time he was planning its long aisles
of columns, its splendid entrance gates, its pavements, and lovely
walls, it was of the long-ago, lovely Diana he was thinking, not of the
hideous idol which had taken her place. And in his heart he built that
temple to the Diana he had once known and loved, and could not imagine
how he came to remember. Never, of course, did he speak of this strange
memory, nor of his hatred for the hideous idol. He would never have
dared to do so, for fear of what might happen to him if anyone knew how
he hated and despised the image held sacred by the Ephesians.

“So he worked and planned, not for the honour of ‘Diana of the
Ephesians’ but for the sake of a lovely memory, or dream perhaps, of
something worth all his toil. And at last this Wonder of the World was
finished. Kings with gifts of gold had helped to build it. The greatest
king of all, Alexander the Great, had offered to spend his wealth upon
it if only his name might be written on the building to last for ever.
The greatest sculptors in Greece, and the greatest painters, had made
statues and painted pictures to adorn the temple which covered the very
same spot where once had stood the rough altar under the tree. But
now the great building and numberless smaller ones connected with it,
stretched over acres and acres of land beyond the little glade, and
thousands of people belonging to the temple lived close to its walls.
Priests, priestesses, men who composed hymns and chants to be sung
in honour of the great idol, people who made copies of her shrine in
silver (like the Demetrius in the Bible) all dwelt in the shadow of the
huge temple of which in a moment you shall have a glimpse.

“But I will first finish the story of Dinocrates.

“After the temple was finished, he went on to fresh work, and became
more and more famous as an architect.

“But better than all the other buildings he planned, he loved the
temple which in his heart he had dedicated to a lovely rather than to
an ugly, cruel goddess. More and more he grudged her image its proud
place in the midst of so much beauty, and longed for the rightful
goddess who should have been there.

“At last, when he was quite an old man, he returned to Ephesus, which
for many years he had not seen, and took a house in the city. There for
some months he lived, often visiting the temple and thinking of days
long past.

“One night Dinocrates could not sleep. His house was in the city
itself, close to the sea, and from his bed he could look out upon the
long pathway of moonlight that stretched across the quiet water far
away to the horizon. As he lay thinking and dreaming, it seemed to
him that a shining figure was floating close above the moon-path on
the sea, and coming swiftly towards him. He just caught a glimpse of
the waving robe, of white feet, of cloudy hair, when such a sudden
drowsiness came over his senses, that he was compelled to close his
eyes. When he opened them again—how long afterwards he could not
tell—the moonlight was still flooding his room. He glanced eagerly
at the path on the sea, but to his disappointment it was empty of
everything but silvery sheen.

“What was it he had seen? Or was it nothing but an idle fancy before
sleep? Dinocrates was coming to believe this true, when all at once
his eyes lighted upon something on the coping of the terrace which lay
before his window. In a moment he was out upon the terrace, bending
over such a lovely little statue as he—who had seen the most famous
sculpture in the world—had never before beheld.

“And there—there at last was the goddess of his dreams—the true Diana
with her wind-blown kirtle, her bow, and the crescent moon above her
forehead!

“Dinocrates did not ask himself how the statue came there. His first
and only thought was to take it straight to the temple where by every
feeling in his heart it belonged.

“Wrapping his cloak round him, and hiding tenderly within its folds
the statue, which was small enough to lift in his arms, he stole out
of the house, and began to walk from the city towards the temple. Just
so—(though he had no memory of it)—three hundred years and more ago,
he had walked in the night to another temple, also his work, dedicated
then to the _true_ Diana. As though moving in a dream, he reached the
outermost courtyard of the new temple, and saw in the moonlight the
gigantic building and the acres of colonnades and avenues of statues
around it.

“Entering by a little door known only to himself, he stood at last
in the still more wonderful interior of the temple, shining and
glowing with marbles white and pink and green-veined, gorgeous with
jewel-covered altars, above which sculptured columns soared towards
ceilings painted in scarlet, gold and blue. A glorious place! A fit
shrine indeed for the goddess whose image he hid so carefully—yet
there in the midst, black and loathsome behind the pyramid of lamps,
burning before her, towered the monstrous statue called Diana!

“All at once Dinocrates was filled with rage. Was it for this terrible
creature he had built a temple that was one of the Wonders of the
World? No, a thousand times no! The likeness of the goddess _he_
worshipped was the lovely little statue hidden in the folds of his
cloak.

“He longed to overthrow the hideous black figure which stood in her
rightful place. Yet he knew that to be impossible. It would take
the strength of many men to throw down an idol so huge and massive.
Suddenly an idea came. He could not shatter, but he might _burn_ the
image! With this thought, he ran towards the mass of lights in front
of it, scattering and upsetting them right and left at the feet of the
wooden figure. Behind it, supported on golden pillars, there was a
gallery, and, without a second’s pause, Dinocrates rushed like a boy up
the marble stairs that led to it, and, standing now high above the head
of the figure, he snatched the little white statue from his cloak, and
held it aloft.

“‘_This_ is Diana of the Ephesians!’ he cried aloud, and his voice
echoed and re-echoed through the aisles and colonnades of the temple.
Before the last sound of it died away, a terrific clap of thunder shook
the temple. Frightened voices were heard on every side, and suddenly,
from every direction, priests in gorgeous robes came rushing towards
the idol. Dinocrates caught one glimpse of them as they snatched the
burning lamps from the feet of the figure, and then everything went
dark.

[Illustration: ‘THIS IS DIANA OF THE EPHESIANS’]

“In another moment, how he could not tell, he found himself in the
open air, listening to a murmur which sounded like the soft rustling
of leaves overhead. Slowly he opened his eyes, and looked round him in
amazement. The great temple had vanished. He was lying under trees in
a little glade, and there before him stood a simple altar of stones
piled together, and behind it, in the hollow of a tree, he saw a little
figure roughly carved. And then, with a cry of wonder, he _remembered_.

“This was the first altar to Diana, and here, as a tiny boy, he had
laid poppies upon it! Scarcely had he seized that memory, when the
altar melted away before his eyes, and out of the mist round the place
where it had stood emerged a small temple. He remembered that, too.
In another life he had planned it, and seen it built. He remembered
the columns he had invented—those pillars of a new shape called later
the _Ionic_ columns. For a moment the temple stood there in the glade,
gleaming in moonlight, and then _it_ too disappeared.... In its place,
rising out of the earthlike smoke which gradually took shape, was
formed at last another, this time a mighty temple, covering the whole
of what had once been the glade. He had built this one, also—in yet
another life—hundreds of years later! And, as he gazed at its rows of
shining columns, he saw that they were like the columns of the first
small temple. To the building now before him—again hundreds of years
later—he had come back as a little boy on the day when his hair was
cut off by the priest. How well he recalled it! How well he remembered
looking at the pillars with some faint memory stirring in his mind, yet
with no idea that long, long before he had built them....

“He had come now to his present lifetime. This was the temple that was
burnt down while he was quite a young man. In another moment what he
expected happened. The building before him vanished, and magically, in
its place, stood the new one, the last work of his hands.... Now at
last he understood how, for hundreds of years, in many different lives
and with long intervals between them, he had been making temples for
Diana—for the true, beautiful Diana. And her worship and honour had
been stolen from her by the hideous black monster now enthroned in
this last and most magnificent temple!... Dinocrates was full of misery
at the thought, and full also of confusion about what had recently
happened. Had he really tried to set fire to the false goddess? Had he
really held up the statue of the true one? What was real in all that
was happening to him, and what was not? He felt wretched and afraid.
Was he mad, or dreaming?

“Such a heavy drowsiness came over him that he was obliged to close
his eyes, and sink down upon one of the marble benches in the outer
courtyard of the temple where now he found himself standing.

“And then, though he could not lift his tired eyelids, he knew that
some wonderful presence was near him. Sweet scents were in the air;
faintly from far away he heard the music of a horn, and then a
beautiful voice spoke close to his ear:

“‘Fear not, Dinocrates,’ he heard, ‘for thou hast ever been a
worshipper of all the truth and beauty thou hast known. Thou hast
striven to place me in a seat of honour, and thy work has not been
in vain. The day will come when another god shall reign in that last
temple, the work of thy hands—a merciful god who shall triumph over
the false Diana worshipped by the Ephesians. And I, too, the Diana thou
hast adored, shall be no more a goddess worshipped by men. But the
thoughts I have given to men shall remain, and the beauty thou hast
seen in me shall remain also. And because thou hast been my faithful
worshipper I will give thee, as I have given thee once before, a happy
passing from this to another life.’

“The voice ceased, and, smiling with perfect happiness, Dinocrates gave
a long sigh, and then lay still.

“His friends, finding him next morning in his bed by the open window,
thought he was asleep, and it was a long time before they knew he would
not wake again.

“‘His last dreams were happy ones,’ they said as they gathered round
him, ‘for, see, he smiles as though in great content.’”

Rachel and Diana both together gave a little sigh.

“Then he didn’t _really_ try to burn the black image?” asked Rachel.
“He was really in his own room all the time?”

[Illustration]

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Sheston, slowly. “It was such a magic night
that I scarcely know what was ‘_real_,’ as you say, and what was dream.”

“Oh, can’t we see the temple just once more,” begged Diana. “It will be
even more lovely to see it, now we know all about Dinocrates!”

“You shall see it again. And, when you see it, remember what the voice
said to Dinocrates about the new merciful God. Your Bible tells you
the story of St. Paul, who, three hundred years after the death of
Dinocrates, went to Ephesus, and, by preaching the new religion of
Christianity, caused that great tumult when all the people shouted:
‘_Great is Diana of the Ephesians_.’ Well, not long afterwards, in the
temple which St. Paul had first seen as a heathen place of worship—but
you shall see.”

The children eagerly turned to the place where the window had once
been. There, in the glaring eastern sunshine, stood the temple once
more, and through its wide open doors they caught a glimpse of the high
altar. But now a great crucifix stood above it, and low at its feet,
overturned, lay the ebony image of Diana of the Ephesians!

In a flash the vision was gone, blotted out by the white mist, and Mr.
Sheston spoke again:

“Three hundred years after Dinocrates passed away, Ephesus had become a
Christian city, you see.... Again many years pass. Ephesus now belongs
to Rome, the mistress of the world. And the temple still stands.
Then Rome grows weak, and a barbarous nation, the Goths, attack her
possessions. You shall see how they treated one of the Seven Wonders
of the World nearly three hundred years after St. Paul was in Ephesus.
Look once more.”

Under the blue sky, in ruins, scattered far and wide, with here and
there a column or a fragment of wall standing, lay the mighty temple.
All about and around it swarmed wild-looking men, clothed in uncouth
garments, with long hair and many of them with red beards. They were
seeking for gold and silver among the ruins, fighting among themselves
like wild beasts for the treasures of the once beautiful temple they
had destroyed. Just for a second the children saw them. Then they, too,
were gone.

“One more glimpse, and the story is told,” said Mr. Sheston’s quiet
voice.

The mist that had gathered dissolved once again. There was the blue
sky, there the sea—though it looked further away than in the days when
Ephesus was great. But where was Ephesus now? Not a trace of the city
remained. Where once it had stood, the children saw in the distance the
few low scattered houses of a small village. Not a trace, not even the
_ruins_ of the great temple of Diana could they see. Instead, mounds
of earth, great pits and long cuttings in the soil, where workmen were
digging, was all that stretched in front of them.

“This is Ephesus as it looks to-day,” Mr. Sheston was saying.

He pointed to the group of small flat-roofed houses in the distance.

“That Turkish village covers the proud city where St. Paul walked, and
where, in the open-air theatre, the people shouted _Great is Diana of
the Ephesians!_ The mouth of the river now choked with mud has pushed
back the sea. Here in front of you, where the temple stood, men of
to-day are digging to find fragments of its pillars and pavements to
send to the British Museum.”

As he spoke the last word, the scene wavered before the eyes of the
children, and through it came the glimmering shape of the schoolroom
window. In another second they sat closed in by four walls, and the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to half-past three.

“Why—why—it was half-past three when you came in,” stammered Rachel.
“The clock must have stopped.”

“I think not,” said Mr. Sheston, smiling quietly. “We shall have plenty
of time for the Museum—if you still want to go.”

Rachel and Diana exchanged glances which contained all the wonder they
felt it was better not to express.

In five minutes, having spoken to Aunt Hester on the way, they were
driving through the streets in Mr. Sheston’s car, and a very little
while afterwards, they entered a hall in the Museum, over the door of
which was written _Ephesus Room_.

“Here,” said Mr. Sheston in a voice which gave no hint of all the
marvellous scenes they had just beheld, “are fragments from two temples
built in honour of Diana of the Ephesians. These broken pillars and
pieces of carving on the right are from the temple that was burnt down
on the night Alexander the Great was born. On the left, are fragments
of the latest temple which was still standing when St. Paul was at
Ephesus.”

Having said this—and, if they hadn’t known what they _did_ know, it
would not have interested the children in the least—he walked on
to look at something on one of the walls, leaving Rachel and Diana
standing in front of a piece of broken pillar.

“St. Paul may have _touched_ this, and seen that boy with wings,”
whispered Diana, gazing up at the beautiful carving upon it. “Oh,
Rachel, hasn’t it been perfectly splendid?”

“Do you know,” returned Rachel, in an answering whisper, “I’m sure he
was once Dinocrates—Mr. Sheston, I mean. He couldn’t know so much
about him if he _hadn’t_ been—could he? And he’s lived ever and ever
so many times. He said so. And he’s been heaps of different people.
Only, when he’s _Mr. Sheston_, you know, we mustn’t talk much about
him.”

Diana nodded gravely. “I thought not. That’s why I didn’t say
anything.... We must only talk about just what’s here,” she added
quickly, as she saw their guide coming back to them.

The rest of the time at the Museum passed delightfully. And then, to
Rachel’s joy, Mr. Sheston took them back to tea at his quaint old
house, and afterwards sent them home together in his car.

“It’s jolly to be alone. Now we can talk about it,” exclaimed Diana,
jumping up and down upon the comfortable springy cushions. “Wasn’t it
exciting and _lovely_? And, somehow, it was all the more exciting in
the Museum when he told us all sorts of things that we shouldn’t have
understood if we hadn’t _seen_ it all, out of your schoolroom window.
It made me quite sure I _had_ seen everything from the beginning. Not
just dreamt it, you know. But, anyhow, we couldn’t have had the _same_
dream, could we?”

“It’s heavenly that you’re a _seven_ child too,” declared Rachel. “I
was getting so tired of having to keep all my adventures a secret
because no one would believe me if I told them. And now there’s
you—and you understand. Oh, Diana, just think how we should have
hated going to the British Museum on a holiday if we didn’t have these
adventures! Aren’t you glad we belong to the ‘seven’ children?”

[Illustration]




FIFTH WONDER

[Illustration: THE MAUSOLEUM OF ARTEMISIA]


It was fortunate that Diana lived so near. Her father’s house was in
fact scarcely five minutes’ walk from Aunt Hester, and the two little
girls whose acquaintance had begun so wonderfully began to see a great
deal of one another.

They had, as you may imagine, much to talk about, and, when they met,
the conversation always turned upon the amazing adventure they had
lately shared.

“Oh, Rachel, did you notice the tiny little girl with the red hair who
walked next to Dinocrates in the glade—when they put the poppies on
the altar?” or, “Do you remember the lovely dress the priestess had?
The one who carried the silver dish in the temple?”

Questions and exclamations such as these flew between Rachel and Diana,
each one reminding the other of something she had noticed particularly,
in the magic scenes beheld from the schoolroom window.

They were, of course, very careful to keep their talks strictly private
ones, and Aunt Hester sometimes wondered why such quiet reigned when
they were alone together. She was however, very glad that Rachel had
found a companion, for she had been rather anxious about having her
little niece to stay with her for so long a time as seven weeks. “You
see, I haven’t had anything to do with children for years, and I was
afraid she would be very dull here,” she told her friends, “but old
Mr. Sheston, who seems to have taken a great fancy to the child, has
been a godsend, and now that there’s this little Diana as well, I feel
I need not trouble about Rachel any longer. I can’t imagine how the
old man manages to interest children so much in the British Museum,”
she often added. “When I was her age, though, of course, I don’t tell
Rachel so, there was nothing I hated more than to be taken to a dull
place like a museum. But these two, Rachel and Diana, are always
clamouring to go. It’s very strange.”

It _was_. And even stranger than Aunt Hester thought, as Rachel and
Diana could have told her. But of all that made the Museum literally a
place of enchantment to the children, she naturally had no idea, nor
did she know that _without_ “Sheshà” and his magic, they would probably
have been as little pleased with museums as she herself at their age.

It was a wet afternoon, and Diana, who had come round to tea with
Rachel, sat perched on the corner of the table, her usual seat, while
every now and then she cast a quick glance at the door.

“Do you think he’ll come?” she asked for the twentieth time. “It’s
raining so horribly that perhaps he won’t.” (_He_ always meant Mr.
Sheston nowadays).

“Oh, I expect he’ll drive up in his car soon,” said Rachel. “It’s seven
days since last time, and I’ve never yet missed seeing him on the
seventh day. Somehow or other I’m _sure_ we shall have an adventure.
Only you never know beforehand how it’s going to happen. And it
generally happens quite suddenly, and just when you don’t expect it.”

The afternoon wore on, tea-time came. Still no Mr. Sheston, and at
last, when it was almost dark, Diana was obliged to go.

She was almost tearful as she said good-bye.

“It’s so awfully disappointing,” she wailed. “Perhaps it’s all
over—all the _magic_, you know, and we shall never see any lovely
things again.”

Rachel was just as puzzled, but not quite so hopeless as Diana.

“Anyhow, even if the magic part is over, he can go on telling us
stories,” she observed. “And his stories are splendid. That one about
the Siege of Rhodes, you know. I tried to tell you, but I can’t do
it properly. Perhaps he’ll tell you himself some time or other. I
_did_ think we should have had at least a _story_ to-day,” she added,
mournfully.

Rachel repeated this remark to herself as she lay in bed several hours
later. The rain had ceased, and a full moon shone in a clear sky. She
had pulled up her window blind, and the beautiful silvery light came
pouring into the room and made her long more than ever for the magic
which Diana feared was “all over.”

For a long time she lay with wide-open eyes staring out of the window
at the radiant sky. And then, all at once—how was it? How could it
be?—she found herself looking at something quite different.

What was that strange shape high up above her head?... Where was she?
What had become of the bed in which a second ago she had been lying?
How did it happen that she was standing upright, gazing about her, in
what seemed a vast hall filled with moonlight and shadows and dim forms?

She heard a voice—Diana’s voice, surely!

“Where are we? I can’t understand _anything_. Can you?”

Rubbing her eyes, Rachel looked again. Yes! Diana was beside her. She
too was in her nightgown, and they were both standing on the pavement
of some huge room which stretched away right and left into darkness. It
certainly ought to have been frightening to find oneself all at once in
an unknown place surrounded by mysterious shapes, in the middle of the
night. But curiously enough, Rachel was not in the least frightened,
nor, judging from her voice, was Diana. Both children were deliciously
excited, indeed. But of fear there was not in either of them a trace.

“Do you know I believe it’s the _Museum_,” Rachel whispered. “Only it’s
a part of it I’ve never been to before.”

“What’s that big thing up there?” returned Diana in an answering
whisper. “Let’s come back a little—we shall see better.”

They were standing just under something that looked in the half light
like a great block of stone on the top of which there was an object
which neither of them could see distinctly.

Taking hands they moved backwards a few steps, and again looked up.

The silver-green moonlight, streaming in from some window high above
their heads, fell full upon the face, and part of the body of a marble
horse.

The statue aloft upon its pedestal looked very grand and majestic. But,
as even in the dim light, the children could see, it was only after all
a _fragment_ of a statue.

“What a lovely horse. But he’s broken,” exclaimed Diana, still in a low
voice. “Isn’t it a pity? There’s only his face and a piece of his body
left. I wonder how he got broken?”

Before she had finished speaking, Rachel suddenly squeezed her friend’s
hand with a tight clasp.

“Look! Look!” she whispered, scarcely able to speak for excitement. For
the strangest thing was happening. A kind of pearly mist was gathering
to form the missing body of the horse, and presently out of the mist,
his face, no longer a marble one, but quivering with life, looked out.
He shook his head and the metal curb in his mouth rattled as he fixed
his great dark liquid eyes upon the children.

“He’s coming down,” cried Diana, half excited, half afraid.

Quickly she leapt back to make room for him, dragging Rachel with her.

In less than a second, with a bound so rapid that they could scarcely
see how he left the pedestal, a graceful, beautiful white horse stood
on the pavement before them, gently pawing the ground, and moving his
head slowly from side to side.

And then, marvel of marvels, he _spoke_.

“Have no fear, O little ones,” they heard, in a tone soft, yet
distinct. “I am here at the bidding of your friend, Sheshà—greatest of
magicians.”

Rachel glanced triumphantly at Diana, as if to say, “I told you so.”
And the beautiful steed went on:

“For this one night I am your slave. Command me. What is it you wish to
know, or to see?”

Diana pinched Rachel’s wrist as a sign for her to speak, and after a
moment she said timidly:

“We would like to know about _you_ first. Why were you on that
pedestal? And all broken? Where do you come from?”

“Something of my history, little maidens, you shall hear later. For the
present, be content to know that you behold in me a horse as famous as
he is beautiful.”

This was said very simply, and the children could well believe its
truth, for never had they seen such a lovely creature as that now
standing before them.

His coat, smooth and soft as ivory satin, gleamed in the moonlight.
His limbs were strong, yet formed with perfect grace, and his dark,
lovely eyes shone in a face that was at the same time gentle and full
of intelligence.

“I don’t wonder that someone made a statue of you,” exclaimed Diana.
“But what a pity it’s so broken. How did it get broken?”

“Many things get broken in the course of two thousand years and more,
little one. Since I was first carved in marble, much that was beautiful
has been destroyed, either by man, by earthquake, by fire, or other
calamities.”

He sighed and turned his head restlessly as he glanced right and left
about the great hall. Rachel and Diana, who till now had been too
engrossed by his marvellous and sudden appearance to pay attention to
anything else, now followed his gaze, and saw that the hall in which
they stood was filled with fragments of buildings, with broken statues,
broken columns, stone or marble lions and other wild animals, all more
or less damaged.

“Behold!” exclaimed their strange companion, after a moment. With a
movement of his head, he indicated something which stood on a massive
block near him, and the moonlight was so bright that the children saw
the object plainly.

“It’s a big wheel!” cried Diana. “What is it?”

“One wheel of the chariot to which my statue was harnessed ages and
ages ago!”

“But where? Why? _Do_ explain all about it,” cried Rachel, eagerly.

“Would you see the monument itself of which these columns, these
statues, these poor broken things are but the fragments?”

“Oh, _yes_!” returned the children, both together. They glanced at one
another rapturously, for evidently this adventure was to be continued.

“Your wish shall be granted,” said the lovely creature. “But first,
that you may gaze upon one of the Wonders of the World with greater
interest, look round you and behold, here, where you stand, the poor
scattered remains of its beauty.... Take note of those statues facing
you, for defaced, disfigured as they are, they represent a famous king
and queen.”

The children looked up obediently at two gigantic statues of a man and
a woman, both clad in robes beautifully draped, who stood side by side
on a great block of stone. Scarcely anything was left of the woman’s
face, though the head of the man was almost perfect.

“You behold Queen Artemisia and King Mausolus,” said their new friend.
“Now turn and regard that pillar behind you.”

The children looked in the required direction and saw, flooded in
moonlight, a tall, beautifully fluted column, to which was attached a
piece of broken ceiling.

“That was once part of the monument you shall presently see as it
looked in its first beauty,” he continued. “Come, mount upon my back.
We tarry too long in this narrow place where there is scarce room to
move, encumbered as it is by these fragments of the past. Let us away
to sunshine and blue sky!”

[Illustration: THEY HAD A GLIMPSE OF THE CITY]

Very gently and carefully, so that he did not touch any of the objects
close to him, the snow-white horse knelt down, and, with a shake of his
bridle, invited the little girls to climb on his back. They glanced
at one another, rather afraid, but Rachel, after a moment’s hesitation,
went boldly up to him and, holding tight to his mane, scrambled on to
his back.

“Come along!” she called to Diana. “It’s always all right when Sheshà
manages anything, and he’s managing this.”

Taking courage, Diana followed, and, in a moment, both children were
seated.

“Well done!” exclaimed their steed. “Have no fear, little maidens. You
are safe. No harm shall befall you.”

With the last words he began to rise from the pavement, floating slowly
upwards.

“Oh! we shall bump against the ceiling!” began Diana, in alarm.

“No. Look! look!! There isn’t any ceiling!” cried Rachel. “It’s all
melted away, and there are the stars....”

In another second they were out in the open air, seated as comfortably
on the back of the white horse as though they were on the schoolroom
sofa, and feeling quite as safe. Below them lay the roof of the British
Museum, and beyond it, stretching for miles and miles, all the crowded
roofs, the spires, the domes and the lights of London. For a moment
they had a glimpse of the wonderful city lying silent under the moonlit
sky, and then they soared upwards so high that all sight of it was lost.

“We’re going awfully fast,” whispered Rachel. “Isn’t it perfectly
lovely?”

And Diana sighed in perfect content. For, indeed, it was beyond all
words wonderful to be rushing through soft, warm air under the moon,
and to feel the gentle rocking motion of the horse’s body under them.
Faster and faster they flew through the ocean of air, and the children
screamed with delight when now and again their giant shadows were
thrown for a second upon a white cloud as they shot past in their
flight.

On and on fled their magic steed, moving his limbs in the sea of air
as a swimmer moves in water, his beautiful mane streaming like a white
mist behind him.... Gradually the moonlight faded, and, for a time,
only the stars shone in the dark blue sky.

“We’re flying over the sea now. I can hear it!” whispered Rachel
presently, for they had dropped lower by this time, and a deep murmur
and even every now and then the gentle splash of waves could be
distinctly heard.

“It’s getting light,” answered Diana, in a sleepy voice.

There was silence for some time, and perhaps both children fell asleep,
for, almost at once as it seemed, instead of a grey gleam of dawn, they
saw that the sky was all flushed with rosy light, and everything was
now clearly visible.

“Look! Look!! We’re quite close to the land!” cried Rachel, pointing to
where rocky mountains stood up against the sky. “Oh, Diana, isn’t it
beautiful?”

[Illustration]

By this time they were hovering above a white-roofed city, curving
round a beautiful blue bay.

“Where are we?” begged Rachel, leaning forward to speak to their flying
steed, who was now moving slowly.

“This land, O child, is Asia Minor, and the part of it you now see was
called long ago, when I was young, Caria. The city just below us is
Halicarnassus.”

“Then the sea is the Mediterranean, I suppose?” said Rachel. “And we
are not so far from Rhodes?”

“Yonder is the island of Rhodes,” he answered, turning his head in its
direction. “You can see it, a dim shape on the horizon—not so very
far, as you say, from the city of Halicarnassus.”

“Oh! what is _that_?” exclaimed Diana, suddenly catching sight of
something gleaming white through a grove of trees at a little distance.

[Illustration]

“The very monument I have brought you to behold. A Wonder of the World.
The place where, carved in marble, my image once stood beside the
statues of a king and queen. Come, let us approach it.”

Turning a little aside from the city itself, the horse dropped
gradually lower, and, after just skimming the ground for a moment,
allowed his hoofs to touch it, and finally stood motionless in front of
a lovely building.

A stately flight of steps, whose balustrade was guarded by marble
lions, led up to a square tower, and higher still to a cluster of
beautiful columns. Above this was a sort of pyramid, with steps
mounting yet again to a chariot of marble in which stood two figures,
a man and a woman. The chariot was drawn by magnificent horses, and
as the children looked at these, they cried out together, pointing to
them, eagerly:

“Why, they’re all of them—_you_!” exclaimed Diana. In her excitement
she let herself slip easily to the ground. Rachel followed her example,
and both stared up at the group of horses on the summit of the building.

“What we saw in the Museum before you turned into a real horse is just
one head of you!” cried Rachel. “Then those people in the chariot must
be the broken statues that are also in the Museum—I mean before they
were broken?” she went on.

The steed bowed his head. “You are now beholding the statues of Queen
Artemisia and King Mausolus as they appeared soon after the sculptors
had finished their work. There also you see _my_ image as it, too,
appeared nearly three thousand years ago. Or, rather, my image four
times repeated in each of the four horses.”

The children were at first silent, for amazement and admiration held
them spellbound. The sun was rising, and bathed in its light, the
building was more lovely than tongue can tell.

“It’s like a tower in a fairy tale. The kind of tower a magician
builds, you know!” declared Rachel, at last.

“But what is it for?” added Diana, after a moment.

“It is a tomb, little maid.”

“A tomb?” echoed Diana. “All that great big beautiful place only for a
tomb?”

“The great Pyramid was a tomb,” Rachel told her in an aside, “and
that’s bigger, you know. Whose tomb is it?” she went on.

“Would you hear the whole story? I am here to tell it, if that should
be your wish. Let us then rest in the shade of these cypress trees
while you listen.”

Their guide lay down and stretched his beautiful body at full length on
the soft turf, while the children, with their hands clasped round their
knees, sat facing him, eagerly waiting for him to speak.

[Illustration]

“I cannot, O little maidens,” he began, “relate to you the history of
this magnificent tomb without telling you something of my own story,
which is in a way bound up with it. Already it must be clear to you
that I am no ordinary horse. The time has now arrived when I may reveal
my name. Know, then, that I am no other than _Bucephalus_, the famous
steed of the greatest conqueror in the world, Alexander the Great.

“I was born in Greece, but when I was still very young, I was sent as
a gift to the King of Macedonia, a country bordering upon my native
land. As yet, no man had ridden me, and being young and untried, I was
so impatient of control that when the king would have mounted upon my
back, I reared and plunged, lashing out with my hind legs in a fashion
so dangerous and unseemly that no one might approach me.

“Full of anger at my fierce behaviour, the king was ordering me to be
sent back whence I came, when his son, the young Prince Alexander,
cried out, ‘This is a noble horse! Will you lose him for lack of a
little skill and courage? Give me leave, my father, to make trial of
him.’

“At first the king, afraid for his son’s life, refused, but, the
entreaties of Alexander at last prevailing, he gave consent for the
prince to approach me.

“At once the noble boy drew near, and boldly seizing me by the bridle,
turned me about so that my face was to the sun. For he had the wisdom
to perceive that what had terrified my foolish young heart was nothing
but my own shadow. This, now that the sun was not at my back, I could
no longer see, and gradually, as I felt the prince’s kind hand patting
my neck and stroking my glossy hide, I ceased to tremble. But, even
so, such was my folly and youthful pride I would not have allowed him
to mount if he had not with great skill taken me by surprise. As it
was, before I had time to consider, I felt him already on my back,
and, bounding forward in anger, I began to run like the wind. Far from
making any endeavour to check my speed, the prince, without touching me
with whip or spur, urged me on with ringing shouts of encouragement,
and not till I was worn out did he draw rein. By that time I was his
slave. His voice, his gentle touch had tamed me, and with delight I
accepted him as my master. Never shall I forget how the king and his
courtiers who had been struck dumb with fear while I raced like a mad
thing, Alexander upon my back, now gathered round, praising us both.

“The king, embracing the prince, exclaimed, as I remember: ‘My son,
seek a kingdom more worthy of thee, for Macedonia is not sufficient for
thy merits!’

“This advice as perhaps I need not remind you, Alexander was not slow
to take, for a few years later, when his father died and he became King
of Macedonia, he began those conquests which have made him for ever
famous. Soon nearly all the world that was then known owned his sway.
In all his victories I, Bucephalus, had my share, for I carried him
into every battle. No one but my dear master would I allow to mount me,
and, in order that he might do this the more easily, it was my custom
to kneel down upon my forefeet as soon as he was ready to bestride
me—just as some little while ago I knelt down for _you_, little
maidens.

[Illustration]

“Ah! those were happy days when we went out to conquer, and great was
my joy in battle. I felt no fatigue when I carried Alexander into the
fight, and no horse ever loved a master so well as I loved mine. No
master on the other hand was more devoted to a steed than Alexander to
his. What other horse, I pray you, has given his name to a city? Yet
of me this may be said, for where at last, worn out in his service,
I died, Alexander built a city where he buried me, and called it
_Bucephalia_.”

The beautiful creature sighed, but a moment later recovered himself.

“You will wonder,” he went on, “when I am coming to the story of the
noble tomb before you, and what it has to do either with me or with
Alexander. This I will now relate. About the time when Alexander became
King of Macedonia, there was a Persian king reigning here in this city
of Halicarnassus. His name was Mausolus, and he had a beautiful wife
called Artemisia, who loved him devotedly.

“You, O little ones, who live in modern days in a grey city, where
people go clothed in sad colours and walk in dingy streets, have no
idea (except from your fairy tales) of the manner in which a Persian
king and queen kept their court nearly three thousand years ago.

“Ah, the beauty and luxury I have seen in those Persian palaces!”
exclaimed Bucephalus, as though to himself. “The marble courtyards with
their springing fountains, the jewelled thrones, the silken robes, men
and women alike blazing with precious stones—and over all the glorious
blue sky and the splendid sun!” He sighed again, and for a while seemed
lost in thought.

“Those days are gone for ever,” he went on at last. “But it was amidst
such scenes, in such pomp and luxury as this, that Mausolus and his
queen Artemisia dwelt in the city of Halicarnassus. Some years they
lived together in great happiness, and then, to the terrible grief of
his queen, King Mausolus died. In her despair and misery, Artemisia
could think of no other means of distraction than that of building to
the memory of her husband so beautiful a tomb that it should be famous
throughout the world, and for ever preserve the name of Mausolus.

“She had vast riches, and because she was a learned and enlightened
queen, she knew that it was to Greece she must turn to spend her
wealth. For in Greece dwelt all the great artists, whether sculptors,
architects or poets.

“This tomb raised to the memory of her husband, Mausolus, was to be the
Wonder of the World. Not content with one Greek architect, therefore,
she employed no less than four to design and beautify the building you
see before you, which faces north, south, east and west. Scopas it was
who built the eastern side, Leochares the west, Bruxis the north, and
Timotheus the south. These were famous men in my day, and even when
they had finished their labour, and even when the tomb of Mausolus was
surrounded by colonnades, supported by beautiful pillars, and lined
with magnificent statues, the queen was not satisfied. The tomb must
be still more wonderful, still more stately. So she sent for Pythios,
a great sculptor, and ordered him to erect above the temple-like tomb,
a pyramid. On the top of the pyramid he was to place a group in marble
which should represent herself and Mausolus, standing side by side, in
a chariot drawn by four horses.

“Now Pythios was anxious to find as a model for these horses the most
beautiful steed in the world. And where, said everyone, could he find a
creature more beautiful than the famous Bucephalus of Alexander?

“So Pythios came to our court and sought of my master permission to
make drawings of me in varying attitudes as I reared or ran. This
being granted, I became the model for all four of the marble steeds
who drew the chariot of King Mausolus and his queen Artemisia. Behold
them! For in magic fashion you see them as they appeared long, long
ago, when this tomb was first completed. Greatly favoured are you,
little children, for other mortals now living must be content to gaze
only upon those broken fragments of the tomb, which, in recent days,
have been drawn from the earth. Long, long ago, was this magnificent
monument destroyed, and were it not for my company and the magic of
Sheshà, who has called me to this earth once more, you would be looking
upon nothing but ruin and destruction here in this place. See how
splendidly white and dazzling appears that noble group against the
deep blue of the sky! And then contrast it with the battered figures,
the one chariot wheel, the broken horse’s head, which is all that now
remains. Still more wonderful that such fragments should at last have
found their way to your grey city of London—thousands of miles away.”

Bucephalus paused once more, wrapped in earnest thought, which the
children scarcely dared to disturb, though they were longing to ask
questions.

“You will ask,” he continued presently, “how I, who at the time when
this tomb was built dwelt far from Halicarnassus, know all that I have
related. Let me explain.

“Though Pythios had taken me as a model for those famous horses of his,
I never thought to behold them, and when I have completed the story of
Queen Artemisia, I will relate how it chanced that I _did_ at last look
upon them with my own eyes.

“The great tomb, so marvellous, so beautiful that it became one of
the Seven Wonders of the World, was at length finished—as you see
it. A miracle in marble, with the queen herself and her dearly loved
husband standing together to endure as she thought for ever. Her task
completed, and with nothing else to live for, the queen pined away, and
a year later died. The monument she raised, as you know, is shattered
to fragments, but, after all, Artemisia’s wish was fulfilled, for the
name of her husband, at least in a fashion, yet lives. Ever since her
day, every splendid tomb, such as that in which kings or great heroes
are buried, has been called a _Mausoleum_. And when people of the
present age speak that word, though they may not be aware of it, they
are uttering the name of Mausolus, so dear to Artemisia.

“And now to return to my own history.

“Fourteen years after the death of this unhappy queen, I bore my
master, Alexander, into yonder city of Halicarnassus, as a conqueror.
He had fought and defeated the sovereign then reigning in Caria, and
all the inhabitants of this country did him homage. How well I remember
the morning he rode out to see with his own eyes this very tomb of
which he had heard so much.

“It was a morning such as this. The sun, just as you see it now, had
newly risen, and then, as now, the marble pillars, the chariot group,
the statues stood out white as sea-foam against a sky, every whit as
deep and blue as you behold.

“Alexander stood transfixed with admiration, and I could not refrain
from a glance of pride at my own image, four times repeated on the
summit of the building.

“‘Ah!’ thought I, ‘when she ordered those marble horses to be carved
by the greatest sculptor of her time, little did Queen Artemisia guess
that the model from which they were designed would one day gallop
proudly into her city, bearing upon his back the conqueror of her
kingdom.’ It was a sad and overwhelming reflection, and, as I gazed
upwards at the statue of Artemisia herself, I half expected her to
descend in wrath from her chariot to punish my insolence. But, after
all, it was Alexander, not I, who had taken Halicarnassus, as I made
haste to assure myself, and I turned my head to look in the face of my
beloved master. He was gazing sadly at the tomb, and I fancied that,
conqueror though he was, he thought with sorrow and pity of the unhappy
queen. For as generous as brave was my dear master, Alexander the
Great.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Quite a long silence followed the last words, and it was a silence
which somehow the children had no wish to break, for they both felt a
little dreamy and disinclined to speak.

“Presently,” thought Rachel, “we’ll ask him to let us go up that
splendid staircase and get inside the temple where Mausolus is buried.
There must be all sorts of lovely things there.” But at the moment she
felt it was enough just to sit still and gaze at the outside of the
tomb, at the burning blue of the sky behind it, at the sparkling bay
beyond, about which the flat-roofed white houses of the city clustered.

“It will be awfully interesting to walk about in Halicarnassus,” she
reflected. “I wonder whether we shall see Queen Artemisia? We _might_.
Anything of course could happen. And it’s all just as real as—as
though it _was_ real,” she added, at a loss how to put it to herself.
It was just when she had made this half-dreamy reflection that she saw
the tomb of Mausolus beginning to totter. It swayed for a moment right
and left before her eyes—and then was gone. So also was the city. She
had a flashing glimpse of mounds of earth, and of a plain scattered
over with stones, before Grayson stood putting a can of hot water upon
the wash-stand.

“Time to get up, Miss Rachel,” she observed, cheerfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

Never had Rachel so longed to see Diana as now. If Diana knew nothing
about this adventure—then it was only a dream, and that would be too
dreadful.

She could scarcely wait till the afternoon, when her friend was to come
round to go for a walk with her. One glance, however, at Diana’s face
when at last she came, reassured her. Their eyes met, and Diana’s were
sparkling and full of mystery. You may imagine what they talked about
in Kensington Gardens that afternoon when they ran on together in front
of Miss Moore.

[Illustration]




SIXTH WONDER

[Illustration: THE LIGHTHOUSE OF ALEXANDRIA]


The day after their walk in Kensington Gardens, Diana, full of
distress, ran in to see Rachel early in the afternoon.

“What do you think? I have to go to the seaside to-morrow!” she
exclaimed, breathlessly. “Mother and Father are going, and they say I’m
to go with them, and—”

“But how lovely!” interrupted Rachel. “For _you_, I mean. It will be
horrid for _me_,” she added, dejectedly. “Why don’t you want to go?”

Diana stared at her. “Don’t you understand? I shall be away more than
a week, and”—she lowered her voice mysteriously—“the _seventh_ day,
you know, will come round, and I shan’t be here, and I shall miss the
chance of an adventure. Oh, I do envy you, Rachel! I’d rather never
go to the seaside again than miss all the exciting things that might
happen. And you see I can’t explain why I don’t want to go—so it’s all
perfectly horrible.”

“But you know I don’t believe it makes a scrap of difference _where_ we
are,” declared Rachel. “If ‘he’ wanted us to go to the Museum, or to
Egypt, or to Rhodes, or anywhere, we could go just the same, whether
we were in London or by the sea, or at the North Pole. You remember
what everybody says about him.” She glanced over her shoulder to make
quite certain that they were alone, and went on to quote in a whisper,
“‘_Sheshà, greatest of Magicians_.’ Salome said that, when I was in
Babylon, and the other night, you remember, Bucephalus said it when
he changed into a real horse. And, of course, he _is_ the greatest of
magicians. He can do anything he likes. I shouldn’t worry a bit about
going away if I were you. I only wish I had the chance.”

Diana’s face became radiant.

“I never thought of that!” she exclaimed. “How clever you are, Rachel.
Oh, if only you were coming, too, it would be perfectly splendid.”

Rachel sighed. “It will be awfully dull without you. But all the same I
expect I shall meet you _somewhere or other_ in a few days. Seven days,
or perhaps nights, from the evening before last, you know!” she went on
with a little chuckle of anticipation.

She felt nevertheless so depressed at the thought of losing Diana, even
for a short time, that what happened next seemed altogether too good to
be true.

“Would you like to go to the seaside with Diana?” enquired Aunt Hester
at tea-time.

Rachel’s face of joy was such an answer that Aunt Hester laughed.

[Illustration]

“Well, I think you may. I’ve just had a note from the child’s mother to
say you could share a room with Diana at the hotel. They’ll be there
for a week.... It will do her good to get out of London for a few
days,” she went on, turning to Miss Moore. “She’s a country child, you
see, and she’s beginning to look a little pale. A breath of sea air
won’t hurt her.”

Rachel could have screamed for delight, and as though things could not
happen too fortunately, just at that moment, Mr. Sheston was announced.

She hadn’t seen him for nearly a fortnight, so she would anyhow have
been very glad of his arrival, but to-day, his coming seemed specially
fortunate as a kind of sign that she had been right in offering
consolation to Diana. A few minutes later, indeed, she was even more
certain of it.

“It’s no use suggesting a visit to your favourite place of amusement,”
said Aunt Hester, in a quizzical tone when she had welcomed the old
gentleman and given him some tea. “Rachel is going to St. Mary’s Bay
for a week with her little friend, so she’ll be far away from such
entertainments as museums.”

“So shall I,” returned Mr. Sheston, helping himself to cake. “Curiously
enough _I’m_ going to St. Mary’s Bay in a day or two for a little
change of air.”

Rachel really _did_ scream for joy at this news, and when, after some
eager questioning she discovered that Mr. Sheston was actually going to
the very hotel in which Diana’s father and mother had taken rooms, she
was almost sure that whatever else happened, she and Diana would not
miss an “adventure.”

It was altogether delightful at St. Mary’s Bay. The weather was
perfect. Diana’s father and mother were, next to her own, Rachel
thought, the nicest father and mother in the world, and it was
gratifying to find that they very much liked their little daughter’s
new friend, Mr. Sheston. All day long, she and Rachel were out of
doors, scrambling about bare-footed on the rocks, and enjoying
themselves tremendously.

At intervals, of course, they discussed their chances of an adventure,
and, as the magic seventh day approached, their excitement increased.

“It makes it such fun that he never says anything about the magic
between whiles, doesn’t it?” Rachel observed on the morning of the day
when something might be expected to happen. “He’s just like a nice old
gentleman, except at ‘seven’ times. Can’t you imagine how people would
stare at him if they knew he was Sheshà, and Dinocrates, and Cleon, and
ever so many more?”

“And that he can make Alexander’s beautiful horse come back again to
the world, and fly with us to Halicarnassus!” put in Diana with a laugh
of triumph. “They only think he’s a dear, clever old gentleman who
knows all about things in the British Museum. It’s jolly to be us and
to know ever so much more about him than just _that_!”

“Don’t forget he’s promised to take us up the lighthouse this
afternoon,” remarked Rachel, as they went into the hotel for lunch.

They reminded him of this promise almost before he had taken his place
opposite to them at the table, and an arrangement was made to meet on
the terrace outside, at three o’clock. “After I’ve had my nap,” said
Mr. Sheston, in his character as an old gentleman who took care of
himself and could not do without his midday sleep.

[Illustration]

Punctually at three o’clock, however, he made his appearance on the
terrace, and they all set out to walk to the lighthouse.

It was built at the end of a long spur of rock which jutted out from
the bay for quite half a mile, and when at last they reached the strong
stone tower, both children thought how lonely was the spot on which it
stood.

It was great fun to climb the twisting stone staircase within the
lighthouse and to come at last into the “lantern”—a round room at the
top, from which there was a wonderful view of the great expanse of sea
now calm and blue as any mountain lake.

“Oh, I should like to live up here!” exclaimed Diana, enthusiastically,
when the lighthouse-keeper had explained all about the working of the
great shining lamp.

“Ah, it’s all very well now, missie,” returned the old sailor-man,
shaking his head. “But you wouldn’t like it so much on some of the
nights we gets up here in the winter. To look at that there sea now,
you’d never think, p’raps, what it’s like in the winter when there’s
a great storm, and the waves come on mountains high, a-dashing all
around, with the wind howlin’ and shrieking like a lot ’er wild
animals, and the spray tossin’ right up to them there winders, and
beatin’ against ’em like mad. And the birds—them sea-gulls flying
round the light as they do—gettin’ all ’mazed-like and confused,
dashin’ theirselves against the glass, poor things, an’ cryin’ most
uncanny.... It’s wild enough up ’ere then, I can tell you. Not
altogether comfortable-like either,” he added, with a broad smile.

“And it’s even worse for the poor sailors in the ships, isn’t it?” said
Rachel, nodding seawards. “How glad they must be to see your light
that keeps them from getting on to the rocks. I should think they
feel awfully glad then that lighthouses are invented. How _were_ they
invented?” she asked, suddenly turning to Mr. Sheston. “I mean who
first thought of making a lighthouse?”

Scarcely had she asked the question, when the glass-encircled room,
with its huge lantern, was blotted out in darkness. Another second
and Rachel felt a fresh wind blowing in her face, and, before she had
time to cry out to Diana, Diana herself gave a scream of amazement and
delight.

“Rachel! Look—look! What is it? Where are we?” she cried.

For a moment Rachel paid no heed to the second question. She had no
idea where she stood. She only knew that she was gazing upon something
very strange and wonderful. It was night and quite dark, and she heard
the sound of water lapping close to her feet. But her eyes were fixed
upon something that looked like a gigantic lily rising out of the sea,
and made visible by _flames_, which at its summit leapt and danced and
streamed upwards towards the night sky.

“We’re on a _ship_,” whispered Diana, excitedly.

And then, for the first time, Rachel realised that she was standing on
the deck of a vessel, and that all around her, sailors were moving,
busy with ropes and sails as they shouted to one another in a language
she did not understand.

The flames darting from the top of the wonderful column lighted up a
great track of water between the ship and the coast, which was plainly
visible in the red glare of the fire. So also was the ship that sailed
over the illuminated sea, and the figures of the sailors on board. They
were like no sailors she had ever seen, for they were clothed in a
strange fashion, and wore curiously shaped caps.

“There is the first lighthouse,” said a well-known voice, and turning
together, the children saw standing behind them—Mr. Sheston. Rachel,
at any rate, knew it was Mr. Sheston, even though he looked quite
different, and wore a tunic with a cloak thrown over his shoulders, for
she was accustomed by this time to seeing him in various guises.

“Oh, _do_ tell us where we are,” she begged. “We’re on the sea, of
course—but what sea is it? And how far are we back into the Past? And
what is your name _this_ time?”

The tall dark man laughed.

“Let me take the questions singly. This is the Mediterranean Sea. We
are about two thousand five hundred years back into the Past. The land
there is the coast of Egypt. And my name you already know, for I am
Dinocrates.”

“Oh, then it was you who built the Temple of Diana?” asked Rachel.

“And you were the little boy with the leopard skin? And
afterwards—hundreds of years afterwards—you built the _first_
temple—and the second and third ones too,” cried Diana. “Mr. Sheston
told us all about you, and——”

But here Diana paused, for she suddenly realised that Dinocrates and
Mr. Sheston were one and the same.

Rachel had evidently come to a like conclusion, for all at once she
said in a whisper, “I thought so.”

There was silence for a moment while both children, rather confused,
were considering the strangeness of this. Then Rachel, who was never
very long quiet, began again:

“There’s a great town behind the tower, isn’t there? When the flames
blow backwards I can see the houses.”

“You behold the city of Alexandria.”

“Alexandria?” repeated Diana quickly. “That reminds me of—_last_ time.
Bucephalus, you know, and Alexander the Great.... Has the town anything
to do with him?”

“Everything,” answered Dinocrates. “He founded it, and gave to it his
own name, the name by which men who live in your world of to-day,
still call it. But it was I who built it,” he added. “That is, you
understand, it was I who made the plans for the building of the city.”

“And did you build the lighthouse too?” asked Diana.

Dinocrates shook his head.

“Nay, not to me, but to another, do the sailors owe that tower of
warning—the tower that has saved many lives.”

“Do tell us about it,” urged Rachel. “Who first thought of it? I
suppose the sort of lights we have now with reflectors and all that,
weren’t invented when _this_ lighthouse was made? But what a good idea
to make flames come out at the top instead.”

“You shall hear the story of the lighthouse,” said Dinocrates, “but let
us sit at our ease while I relate it.”

He pointed to a coil of ropes, and the children, settling themselves
close together upon it, found that it made a most comfortable seat.

Dinocrates meanwhile wrapping his cloak about him lay full length
upon the deck near them, and turned his face in the direction of the
lily-white tower with its crown of leaping flames. For a moment he did
not speak, and the children were so impressed by the wild beauty of the
scene that they too were silent.

The vessel, as strange to their eyes as were the sailors who formed
its crew, glided slowly and softly over the dark water on which lay
a pathway of crimson light. To and fro moved the sailors, sometimes
singing, sometimes laughing, sometimes shouting to one another as they
went about their work, but paying no heed to their visitors.

The flames from the lighthouse rising and falling revealed a coastline
with a fringe of white houses, and on the sea other ships moving in
various directions, their sails sometimes lighted up brightly in the
red glow of the fire.

Rachel, who had sunk into a sort of happy dream, started when at last
their companion spoke.

“Do you remember,” he began, “what Bucephalus, that famous horse, has
already told you concerning his master, Alexander the Great? How that
he set out to conquer the world? Bucephalus has, I know, related to you
how his master took the city of Halicarnassus in Asia Minor and visited
the tomb of Mausolus, built by the sorrowing Queen Artemisia. That,
however, was only the beginning of his victories.

“A little later, when all Asia Minor owned his sway, he turned his
thoughts to Egypt and conquered _that_ country also. Sailing in his
barge up the great river Nile which waters the land, he came at last
to where it flows out into the sea—this very sea upon which you are
now sailing. But he found no city there, such as by the light of that
beacon fire you now behold. Only a few poor huts stood then at the
mouth of the great river. ‘Here,’ thought Alexander, ‘is the place for
a mighty port, and here a mighty town shall arise. But whom shall I
employ to build such a city for me? Who is the greatest architect now
living?’ Instantly my name was upon his lips. For, only a year before,
he had seen the great new temple I had completed at Ephesus, in honour
of Diana.

“At once he sent for me, and straight from the building of that temple
in Ephesus I came hither. Let me now show you, little maids, what I
found where now that lighthouse and that city stand. Rise, and bow with
closed eyes seven times in the direction of the shore.”

Rachel and Diana needed no second invitation. They leapt to their feet
and obeyed.

[Illustration: THE PHAROS LIGHTHOUSE]

“Open now your eyes and behold,” said Dinocrates.

Again the children did as they were told, and found, scarcely to their
surprise now, so accustomed to marvels had they grown, that the night
had vanished. It was broad daylight, and the sun streamed down upon a
bare rocky island separated by a narrow belt of sea from the mainland.
There was no city, no lighthouse, only a few rough huts upon the rocky
island round which the sea-gulls circled, uttering sad cries. A mighty
river, flowing through miles of flat land, poured its waters into the
sea close to the island.

“This,” said Dinocrates, when the children had gazed a moment at the
scene, “was what I found, when, at the command of Alexander, I came
hither to build the city. That bare island in front of the mainland was
then, and is still called, the Isle of Pharos.”

He waited a moment.

“Close once again your eyes, and wait till I pronounce the magic
number,” he presently directed.

At the word _seven_, the children looked again, and together uttered a
long _Oh!_ of astonishment at the change which had taken place. There
was the island indeed, but no longer bare and uninhabited. A gleaming
bridge joined it on the land side to a city whose temples, open-air
theatres, statues and monuments shone white and splendid in the
sunshine. The whole, including three sides of the island, was enclosed
by a mighty wall with turrets at intervals upon it, and the water space
between the island and the city was now a harbour in which ships rode
at anchor.

“There stands Alexandria as I built it over two thousand years ago,”
said Dinocrates, quietly. “And there, bearing the same name, the name
of Alexander the Great, it stands to-day. English sailors anchor their
ships in its port, many English people live there, and it has heard the
guns of the Great War that is just over.”

“Not like Babylon, or Ephesus—all in ruins,” murmured Rachel.
“Alexandria has _lasted_.”

“It has lasted—but it no longer looks as you see it here. Time and
change! Time and change!” murmured Dinocrates, softly. “It is a modern
city now, and most of what _I_ built is ruins beneath its present
squares and houses.”

“But there’s no lighthouse—even as we see the place now,” exclaimed
Diana.

“There was no lighthouse even in my time, little child. It was not till
I had been dead twenty years and more that the beacon tower was built.”

[Illustration]

Rachel glanced at him. “After you had—gone on? Gone into another life,
you mean?” she said.

Dinocrates smiled kindly at her.

“That is a better way of saying the same thing, little maid,” he agreed.

“But you promised you would tell us about the lighthouse,” began Diana,
after a moment. “_Do_ tell us, please,” she urged.

Again Dinocrates smiled.

“I am coming to it, impatient one,” he began, when Rachel interrupted.

“I want to know all sorts of other things first,” she declared. “Did
Alexander live here after the town was built?”

“Nay, and he never saw more of the city than its beginning. He was
marching always from country to country, conquering the world, and had
no time to return to the place which bears his name. Though, after all,
I am wrong. He _did_ come back. But when he came, Death, not he, was
the conqueror. He died in Babylon, but they brought him hither, to the
city built at his command, and here he was buried.”

“Was his lovely horse dead by that time?” asked Diana. “I hope so.
Because he would have missed his master.”

“Why, yes,” put in Rachel. “Don’t you remember that Alexander buried
him and named a town after him?”

“Of course! How silly of me....” Diana turned expectantly to Dinocrates.

“And about the lighthouse?” she persisted.

“Our ship is about to enter the harbour,” said their companion. “We
will land, and go to the spot where the lighthouse finally arose. There
I may best tell you its story.”

In a few moments the little vessel on the deck of which they stood, had
been safely steered into the harbour between the island of Pharos and
the city. At a quay running alongside of the island, they stepped off
the ship, and “Dinocrates” led the way to a rock jutting out into the
sea. It was a position from which there was a view of the busy harbour,
and of the long bridge joining the island to the city, over which
passed continually a gaily coloured crowd. Mules with gaudy trappings
were driven by shouting boys. Ladies in silken litters were borne along
by dark-skinned slaves. Men dressed in tunics like the one worn by
“Dinocrates” sauntered by, and from the city itself came a confused hum
of voices.

By turning their backs to the bridge the children found the blue sea
almost at their feet, stretching away to the distant horizon.

Dinocrates began to speak again, and the water lapping against the
rocks close at hand murmured between the pauses of his story.

“There lies the city I began to build while Alexander was yet alive,”
he said, pointing backwards over his shoulder. “I was a famous
architect in those days, and rich men sent me their sons to learn
from me. But among all my pupils the best, the most brilliant, was
Sostratus. He came to me when he was but a lad, and I early foretold
for him a great career. I loved him dearly, and he was to me like a
son. His native land was Greece, and, though he spent some years with
me during the building of Alexandria, he returned more than once to his
home, and on one of these visits fell deeply in love with a beautiful
Grecian maiden.

“Never shall I forget the happiness of Sostratus, when he told me
that the maiden, with her parents, was coming to Alexandria, where
the marriage was to be celebrated. All was prepared for the bride,
and on the appointed day, she set sail to cross the stretch of sea
between Greece and Alexandria. But, alas, the weather, till then calm
and peaceful, suddenly changed. A great storm arose, and the ship,
when it came into sight, though it held bravely on, was tossed like a
cockle-shell upon the waters.

“Now this bay of Alexandria is difficult of navigation, and in the
darkness, full of danger. Night came on; there was no friendly beacon
fire to show the way, and presently we, who were gathered here on
this very spot, heard the shouts and cries of drowning men. Powerless
to help, we waited in despair for daybreak, only to see the waters
strewn with wreckage. Close to land, the good ship, with all on board,
had gone down for lack of a light to show the captain where lay the
treacherous rocks.

“Sostratus was wild with grief, from which, as time went on, I strove
in vain to rouse him. Nothing I could say or do would comfort him, till
at last, when I was ill and near to death, I called him to my bedside
and urged him not to waste his life in useless idle despair.

“‘Build something,’ said I, ‘which shall be at once a monument to the
memory of your bride, and of use to the living. So shall you not have
passed through this your present life in vain.’

“‘What if I should build a light-tower?’ he asked presently.
‘Something that shall serve as a beacon and a warning to sailors?
Already has the thought of such a tower begun to take shape in my mind,
and now, O master, I swear to thee that I will not rest till such a
building arises, for by such means, grief such as I have endured may be
spared to others.’

[Illustration]

“With that he began to discuss with me how such a tower, the first of
its kind, could be constructed so that a light should stream constantly
from its summit during the darkness of the night. And I, seeing him
roused from his grief and ready for a new interest, passed some
days later, happily from that life. All that follows, I learnt long
afterwards when once more I returned to this earth.

“Even before my own death, Alexander the Great had passed away, and the
world he had conquered was being divided amongst the generals who had
fought under his command. This land of Egypt, with Alexandria as its
port, fell to one of them—a man whose name was Ptolemy. (He it was who
helped the Rhodians against Demetrius in the famous siege),” he added,
turning with a smile to Rachel.

“And you were _Cleon_ then—not Dinocrates,” she exclaimed quickly.
“You remember I told you about that siege, Diana?”

Diana nodded. “But do go on about Sostratus,” she begged, turning to
Dinocrates. “Ptolemy let him build the lighthouse, I suppose?”

“After my death,” continued their friend, “my pupil went to King
Ptolemy with his plans, and he was ordered not only to set about the
building of the tower, but to spare no expense and to make it the most
beautiful monument he could possibly accomplish. So Sostratus worked
and thought and invented, and in time, on the very spot where now we
are seated, there rose the tower you beheld a short while ago. Four
hundred feet high it towered above this rock, built of white marble,
slender as a lily, yet strong as steel. And in the cup-like hollow
at the top, was sunk a brazier, that is, a huge basket of iron in
which a fire was kept always burning. The men who from the gallery
around this hollow tended the fire and fed the flames, were the first
lighthouse-keepers, and the tower itself, being the first lighthouse,
was the model for others all over the world. The lighthouse on the spur
of land at St. Mary’s Bay, little maids, owes its existence to the
marble tower of Sostratus, as in like fashion do all the other famous
lighthouses of modern days, such as Eddystone, the North Foreland, and
the rest. No longer, it is true, do naked flames stream upwards into
the darkness from these modern towers—for, in two thousand years other
light has been invented, as well as shielding panes of glass. Nowadays,
strong electric globes shoot forth their gleams over the sea at night.
But the tower of Sostratus was not only the first of these friendly
beacons but also the most beautiful as a monument. So beautiful,
indeed, and in those early days so strange to the sight, that it was
named amongst the Seven Wonders of the World.”

“Was it called the Tower of Sostratus?” asked Rachel.

Dinocrates smiled and shook his head.

“Nay,” he returned, “though that was the wish of Sostratus himself. It
was called the _Pharos_ Tower—after the name of this island upon which
it stood.”

“Why,” exclaimed Diana suddenly, “_phare_ is the French word for
lighthouse. Is that because of the Pharos tower?”

Diana had a French governess, and to Rachel’s wonder and admiration,
spoke French, if not as well, at least as quickly as she talked in
English.

“Yes,” answered Dinocrates. “Every time French sailors use that
word, even though they have no knowledge of its meaning, the work of
Sostratus is mentioned by men who live to-day. His work is remembered,
his _name_ forgotten, even though he strove hard that this should not
be the case.

“Listen, and I will tell you what chanced. When the tower was at length
finished and stood gleaming white on this headland, the time had come
for an inscription to be placed upon it, and Ptolemy, King of Egypt,
ordered Sostratus to engrave these words upon the marble: _King Ptolemy
to the gods, the saviours, for the benefit of sailors_.

“Now Sostratus, to whom the lighthouse represented all that he now
cared for in life, was determined that his own name should be read, if
not at the moment, at least in time to come. Yet he dared not disobey
the King’s command. This, then, was the device by which he tried to
ensure remembrance.

“Deep in the marble he first engraved:

“‘_Sostratus, son of Dexiphanes_, to the gods, the saviours, for the
benefit of sailors.’

“Having thus placed his own, instead of the King’s name upon the tower,
he then covered up the whole inscription with mortar, and on the top of
it engraved the inscription commanded by Ptolemy. Well he knew, that
in the course of years, the mortar would decay and his own name become
visible.... Rise, make seven obeisances towards the sea, and you shall
behold, if it please you, the lighthouse as it appeared a hundred years
after Sostratus and King Ptolemy alike had left this world.”

The children lost no time in obeying, and when they opened their eyes
they found themselves, to their delight, standing at the foot of the
beautiful white tower. Dinocrates, smiling, stood beside them, and
pointed to some lettering upon the tower at a little height above his
own head. The inscription was cracked and defaced, and as the words
were in Greek, they could not read them, but in a hollow, where the
mortar had broken away at the beginning of the sentence, they saw a
name which Dinocrates pronounced aloud—the name of Sostratus, now at
last plainly to be seen.

The children gazed with interest upon the splendid graceful tower
springing high above their heads, and then looked from it across the
bridge to the city.

“Why, the town is ever so much bigger. Twice, three times as big,”
cried Rachel, as she saw the clustering houses and let her eyes wander
over the new domes and colonnades, courtyards and gardens visible on
the other side of the harbour.

“A hundred years have passed between the opening and shutting of your
eyes,” said the voice of Dinocrates. “The city founded by Alexander and
built by me has had time to grow and to become one of the most famous
homes of learning in the world. There great men have lived and died,
and been forgotten, even as Sostratus, despite this inscription made
in vanity, is forgotten. But Alexandria still lives, though the Pharos
Tower, the Wonder of the World, is no more. And there, to-day, men
who have fought in this last great war are planning to dig for buried
treasures under modern houses and squares. Time goes on and men are
forgotten, but the work of their brains lasts longer, and sometimes
bears fruit centuries after they themselves have departed.... Here, for
instance, we stand in this modern lighthouse....”

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Mr. Sheston (no longer in the guise of Dinocrates) who uttered
the last words. Dinocrates, the Pharos Tower, the City of Alexandria
had vanished, and a moment later Rachel and Diana were listening to the
sailor-man.

“I don’t know who invented them,” he was saying, as though in answer
to a question, “but, whoever it was, he did a good piece of work.
There’s too many wrecks as it is, but there’d be a considerable number
more if it wasn’t for these ’ere light-’ouses.”

“_We_ know who invented them,” whispered Diana to Rachel, as they
clattered down the winding stairs of the tower.

“Didn’t I tell you that being away from London wouldn’t make any
difference?” demanded Rachel, triumphantly. “Sheshà can do _anything_!”

“Hush! Here comes Mr. Sheston,” Diana warned her in a low voice. “And
I suppose we mustn’t say anything. But _he_ knows that _we_ know he’s
Sheshà and Dinocrates—”

“And Cleon—and all the rest,” put in Rachel. “Isn’t it wonderful
and—and _fun_, you know?”

Mr. Sheston, who had lingered in talk with the old sailor upstairs, now
joined them, and all the way home the children chattered demurely about
the St. Mary’s Bay lighthouse. There was no mention of the Pharos at
Alexandria.

[Illustration]




SEVENTH WONDER

[Illustration: ·THE STATUE OF JUPITER·OLYMPUS]


Both the children were back again in London a few days later, sadly
missing the sea and the freedom of St. Mary’s Bay, of course, but
consoled by the knowledge that Mr. Sheston had also come back to town.

One afternoon, soon after their return, Rachel met Diana with a radiant
face.

“Dad and Mother are coming back,” she exclaimed joyfully. “They’re on
their way now. And Mother is ever so much better, Dad says. And this
day week I shall see them, and go home with them. Isn’t it perfectly
lovely?” But there were sudden tears in Diana’s eyes, and, in the midst
of her excited talk, Rachel paused. “You’re to come and stay with me,
of course,” she declared hastily. “Do you think I should be so glad
if I had to say good-bye to you? Mother says she’s writing to _your_
mother to ask her to let you stay for a month. And she will, won’t she?”

This announcement had the effect of making Diana’s face almost as
joyful as Rachel’s, and during their walk that afternoon their
chattering tongues never ceased. There was so much to talk about.

When Rachel had described all the delights of her country home, the
farm, the garden, the river with its punt, the woods in which they
could build huts of branches—the conversation turned, as usual, upon
the “adventures” in which Mr. Sheston was concerned.

“There’s still another one to come, you know,” Rachel presently
declared. “At least I expect so. I’ve been here six weeks now, and
every seventh day it’s—_happened_. And there’ll be another seventh day
on Wednesday.”

“I do wonder what it will be this time, don’t you?” said Diana. “It’s
so exciting not knowing where it will begin. Perhaps in the British
Museum again. I rather hope it will be there. It’s so jolly to go with
‘him’ just as other children go with grown-up people to the Museum,
and yet to know all the time that something frightfully interesting is
coming.”

“Yes, that’s just what _I_ feel is so jolly about it,” Rachel agreed.
“You go through all those rooms and you see statues and tombs and
stones and things, and they all look _dead_, and you can’t believe the
people who saw them thousands of years ago were just as much alive
as we are now. Every time I go to the Museum I feel like that at
first. Don’t you? And then it _happens_, you know. Quite suddenly. And
everything that looked all dull and dead comes to be _real_. I hope it
will begin in the Museum this time.”

It did. But before it happened, and as a last treat for her niece, Aunt
Hester took both children to the circus at Olympia.

“What is _Olympia_?” asked Diana, suddenly, when she and Rachel, full
of anticipation, were walking with Aunt Hester to the omnibus.

“It’s where the circus is held,” said Aunt Hester. “It’s a good long
ride, so we must make haste.”

“But I mean what _is_ it?” persisted Diana.

“Oh, it’s a great building. Big enough for all sorts of entertainments,
as well as the circus, to go on inside it.”

“Why is it called Olympia?” asked Rachel. “It’s such a funny name for a
place where there’s a circus.”

“You must ask Mr. Sheston,” returned Aunt Hester, vaguely. “He’ll tell
you why, better than I can. By the way, he’s going to take you both to
the Museum to-morrow. I had a note from him this morning. Come along,”
she exclaimed, hurriedly, as they turned a corner, “there’s the
omnibus just starting. We must run for it.”

Seated opposite to one another in the omnibus when rather breathlessly
they had settled down, Rachel and Diana exchanged meaning glances.

“It _is_ going to begin there, you see,” whispered Rachel at the
earliest opportunity, and Diana agreed with a nod and smile of secret
delight.

They enjoyed the circus immensely, but beautiful as the horses were,
and much as they admired them, both children thought of another and
still more wonderful horse than any that appeared in the ring.

“But, then, Bucephalus was the loveliest and cleverest thing in the
world,” observed Diana, in a low voice, after Rachel had murmured his
name. “And I’m sure he would hate to do tricks in a circus. He was a
_war_ horse.”

“And used to real battles,” agreed Rachel, in an answering whisper.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Well,” said Mr. Sheston next day, when Miss Moore had left both the
children with him at the entrance to the Museum. “Well, how did you
like the circus at Olympia yesterday?”

“Oh, it was lovely!” they exclaimed together.

“Aunt Hester said we were to ask you why it’s called _Olympia_,” put in
Rachel, as they began to walk slowly through a statue-lined room that
had become familiar.

“We may find the answer this afternoon,” answered the old gentleman,
turning into a room that Rachel knew already. It was the room
containing the statues of the headless women clothed in beautiful
drapery.

“These are Greek statues, aren’t they?” she began, pointing to the
group in the middle of the room. “They were on the outside of a temple
once, weren’t they? I forget what it was called.”

“The Parthenon in Athens,” Mr. Sheston told her. “There’s a model
showing the temple as it stood in ancient days, over there in that
glass case. We’ll go and examine it in a minute. But first look up and
see those young men riding on horseback.”

He pointed to a frieze in marble which ran the length of the walls and
represented a procession of youths mounted upon beautiful horses.

“Now let us have a look at this model which shows part of Athens as it
appeared two thousand years or so ago,” he went on, after a moment.
The children followed him to a stand upon which, modelled in plaster,
was a rocky hill with various buildings like fair-sized toys scattered
over its slope. The names of these buildings were written below them,
on the white plaster hill, and Diana had just exclaimed, “_Here’s_
the Parthenon!” when a young voice, which neither of the children
recognised, but which sounded close at hand, said:

“_Seven times with closed eyes shall you bow._”

“Diana!” cried Rachel, a few seconds later, “It’s Athens. _Real_
Athens, you know!”

There was no doubt about its reality, for they felt the warmth of the
sun, saw the overarching blue sky, and gazed with wonder and delight
upon a beautiful scene.

A hill-side stretched before them, no longer of plaster, but a _real_
hill-side, scattered over with marvellous buildings in white marble,
with groves of trees, and stretches of gardens between them.

“Look! Look!” exclaimed Diana, recognising at least one of the
buildings. “That’s the Parthenon. There are the great beautiful women
up in that pointed place above the columns.”

“And they’re not broken!” cried Rachel, excitedly. “They’re quite
perfect. Look at their faces, and their arms. They had no faces and no
arms the last time we saw them.”

“And there’s the procession of boys on horseback!” cried Diana,
pointing to the frieze....

       *       *       *       *       *

“Will it please you to come with me, O maidens?” enquired a voice, so
near that both the children started before they turned round.

Behind them stood a boy of perhaps eleven or twelve years old. He was
dressed in a shirt or tunic of white wool, without sleeves, and over it
a white purple-bordered cloak wrapped about him in such a way as to
leave his right arm and shoulder free. His legs were bare, but on his
feet were sandals fastened with slender cords of leather strapped about
his ankles.

His head was covered only by its thick crop of red-gold hair which
curled closely about his head, and was one of his many beauties. For he
was an exceedingly handsome boy—slim, yet strongly built. He held his
head and body well, and all his movements were quick and graceful.

“Who are you?” stammered Rachel, the first to recover from surprise.

“My name is Agis,” said the boy. “I am commanded by Sheshà, greatest
of magicians, to be your guide through our city of Athens. Later, I
understand, he himself will conduct you to the Olympian games.”

Again, as it had so often happened before, though the language spoken
by the boy was not her own, Rachel understood him perfectly.

“I suppose it’s Greek he’s talking,” she thought hurriedly before she
began to ask questions.

“That’s the Parthenon, isn’t it?” she asked, pointing to the gleaming
temple. “We’ve seen those statues up there before. At least, we’ve
seen——” She was going to say “bits of them,” but Diana pulled her
sleeve, and she stopped just in time to remember that it was no use
trying to explain to a boy who lived thousands of years ago, all about
the British Museum!

“Will you tell us what god is worshipped here?” put in Diana, politely.

“No god, but a goddess, the great Pallas Athene,” returned the boy,
glancing at her with his bright eyes.

“She’s the same as _Minerva_, you know,” whispered Diana quickly,
having learnt this from her father.

“Within,” the boy went on, “stands the statue of the goddess made by
Phidias, the wondrous sculptor.”

“Is he alive now?” enquired Rachel.

Agis laughed. “Nay. He has been dead two hundred years and more. You
must have come from a very far country, O maidens, to be so ignorant!”

“We have,” said Rachel, smiling in her turn. If only the boy could
have known. It was only two hundred years for _him_ since the sculptor
Phidias died, while for her and for Diana it was considerably more than
two _thousand_ years. “We don’t know anything about your country,” she
continued, “so will you please explain everything.”

“That would take me far too long, because I must soon return to the
gymnasium, whither you may accompany me. I have only brought you here
for a moment that you may glance at the most famous of our temples and
public buildings. The city itself lies down yonder.” He pointed to a
sea of white flat-roofed houses below.

“What is that place, high up on the hill?” asked Diana.

“The citadel—our fort of defence which we call the Acropolis. Beneath
it, as you see, and under its protection, as it were, are the other
buildings, of which the most precious is the Parthenon.”

“Can’t we go in, and look at the statue of the goddess?” begged Rachel.

Agis shook his curly head.

“Time is lacking. But it may be that, some days hence, you will see
another, and perhaps even more famous statue, carved also by Phidias.
It stands in the temple of Zeus at Olympia.”

The children exchanged quick glances at the mention of the word.

“What _is_ Olympia?” asked Diana, and as she put the question she
suddenly remembered asking it before. Yesterday, was it?... It seemed
ages and ages ago, or like something in a dream. She and Rachel had
been then on their way to the circus at _Olympia_, and she had asked
Aunt Hester——

Her bewildering thoughts were interrupted by a long shrill whistle from
Agis. It was so like the sort of whistle her brother Jack gave when he
was teasing her, that Rachel laughed. After all, Agis was very much
like an ordinary schoolboy, even though he did talk in what she called
“an old-fashioned long-ago” style.

“You know not _Olympia_, maidens? What then have you to live for, if
you know not the Olympic games?”

“We really _don’t_ know anything about them,” said Rachel,
apologetically. “You see we live in a different country, and—well, in
a different time.”

She couldn’t help adding this, in her desire to defend herself from the
charge of ignorance, but the boy took no notice of the last remark.

“Come with me, and by degrees it may be I shall enlighten you,” he
said, still in a mocking voice.

He turned quickly, and Rachel and Diana, after one backward glance at
the snow-white temple adorned with its perfect sculpture, followed him
meekly down the hill. In a few moments they found themselves threading
their way through the narrow streets of the city of Athens. These
streets were bounded on either side by blank walls, broken here and
there by a door.

“But where are the houses?” enquired Diana presently.

“These doors lead to our houses,” returned the boy, tapping one of them
as he passed.

“There aren’t any windows!” objected Rachel.

“Would you have windows upon the street?” said Agis. “An idea comic
indeed, O maidens!”

The children were too occupied with the strangeness of everything
around them to reply to this. Every now and then they emerged
from narrow roads between walls into a great square, and here the
surrounding buildings were magnificent. There were long colonnades
where people, dressed more or less in the same fashion as Agis, lounged
or walked, and often in the midst of the square they saw beautiful
statues.

“Look!” said Diana presently, pointing to a garland of leaves hung upon
the knocker of a door. “Why is that wreath put there?” They had turned
into another narrow street by this time.

“A new-born child is in the house without doubt,” returned Agis
carelessly. “A boy.”

“How do you know?” asked Rachel.

“If it had been a girl, there would be a wreath of wool, instead of
olive leaves. You may see such a one over there,” replied Agis,
nodding in the direction of another door further on, where a twisted
loop of violet wool hung from a knocker.

The children were much interested.

“It’s awfully nice to know like that about the babies,” declared
Diana.... “Where are we going, Agis? What is this place?” she added
curiously, as the boy ran on in front of them up a broad flight of
steps leading to an imposing building.

“This is the gymnasium, and unless we hasten, I shall be late, and my
instructor will be angered.” Agis looked over his shoulder to say this.
“Follow me, and pay no heed to anyone, for no one will pay heed to you.
Sheshà has put you under my guidance—I know not why. But I know that,
except to me, you are invisible. Go boldly into yonder courtyard and
watch. I must first leave my garments in the corridor.” He ran quickly
down a passage to the right, and the children, full of wonder, walked
on into a sunny square, enclosed by high walls, where little boys were
going through all sorts of exercises.

“Oh, don’t they look pretty without their clothes!” was Diana’s first
exclamation. For all the boys were naked, and as they ran and leapt,
and the sunshine fell upon their little white bodies, they did indeed
look beautiful.

“He said it was a _gymnasium_,” said Rachel. “But there aren’t any
rings and poles and things, like there are in our gymnasiums. I suppose
this was the _first_ sort of gymnasium, and ours are named after it?”
she went on suddenly, as the idea struck her.

“There’s Agis!” cried Diana, as the now naked boy appeared. “Doesn’t he
look like a statue come to life? Oh, look, Rachel! What is he going to
do? That man—I suppose he’s the master?—is rubbing him all over with
something. It’s oil, isn’t it? and those other boys are being rubbed
with it too.”

“It’s to make them move their bodies easily, I expect,” said Rachel.
“You know how oil makes stiff things like rusty locks quite smooth and
easy. I suppose it’s the same with people’s joints.”

“Now they’re throwing sand over one another!” Diana exclaimed. “What’s
that for, I wonder? Oh! they’re going to wrestle. Agis and that dark
boy together. Do you see?”

“That’s why they put sand on themselves then,” suggested Rachel.
“They’d be too slippery to hold one another without. Oh, _do_ look!
Isn’t it jolly to see them? Agis is winning! I’m sure he’s winning.”

[Illustration]

With breathless interest the children watched the boys as they turned
and twisted—all their movements swift and graceful as the movements
of beautiful wild forest animals. After the wrestling they saw several
races between companies of boys, and then looked on at exercises in
throwing a round object something like a quoit made in lead.

It was all wonderful to see. To sit in the sunshine, to hear the voices
and laughter of the boys, to watch their graceful movements, and yet to
know that the scene before them was really far away—back two thousand
years and more into the Past, indeed, was a strange-enough experience.
Every now and then, when they realised this, it made both of the
children very quiet, and even a little sad.

They forgot this impression however when, at last, the training over,
Agis beckoned to them to follow him out of the gymnasium.

In a few moments he was dressed again, and as the children walked on
either side of him, through squares and streets, they kept up a fire of
eager questions.

“This is the last day of our training,” explained Agis. “To-morrow
we start on our journey, and in three days begin the great games in
Olympia. May the gods grant me patience to live till then!” he went on
excitedly.

“But you haven’t yet told us what Olympia _is_,” urged Diana.

“Strange that you are ignorant of the Olympic Games which are renowned
throughout the world,” sighed Agis. “Yet do I remember that Sheshà bade
me have patience to tell you everything.

“Know then, as all the world but you, O maidens, are aware, that every
five years, at Olympia, which is in a part of Greece called Elis, games
are held at which it is the highest honour in the world to compete. For
the four years between the great year of the games, all youths who are
Grecian by birth are trained at schools called gymnasia—one of which
you have lately beheld.

“Towards the end of the fourth year, in every part of our country,
those who have best acquitted themselves in the training are chosen to
go to Olympia and contend for the prizes.”

“Then _you_ are chosen,” said Rachel joyfully.

“I to my great content am to run in the first race, and my elder
brother, Phidolas, is also among the athletes. _He_ is to compete in
the horse race, for he is a skilled rider, and has the most perfect
mare that was ever bred,” he added enthusiastically. “Her name is Aura,
and presently, if it please you, we will see her.”

“Oh, we _love_ horses!” exclaimed Diana. “Do tell us some more about
the games. Who began them? How long have they been going on?”

“For a thousand years and more. Zeus, father of all the gods, first
commanded them to take place, to celebrate his victory over the giants
who, before him, ruled the world. Since then, they have been held, as
I have already said, every four years, for the honour and glory of
heroes.”

“_Zeus_ is the same as Jupiter, I think,” whispered Diana to Rachel.
“Yes. I remember. Father told me so.”

By this time Agis had stopped at one of the doors set in the blank
wall of a narrow street, and he lifted and let fall the knocker with a
resounding clang.

“This is my home. I must set some repast before you, for indeed you
must need it, O strange and ignorant maidens,” he added, with his
teasing schoolboy smile.

The door was opened at the moment by an old man whom the children at
once guessed to be a servant.

“Or a _slave_, I expect,” said Rachel, as Agis hurried on in front.
“They had slaves in Greece, didn’t they?”

“Now we shall see the inside of a Greek house as it was thousands
of years ago,” returned Diana eagerly.... “Isn’t this a _splendid_
adventure?”

They found themselves in a passage which led into a square courtyard
roofed by the blue sky. A colonnade ran the length of the four sides of
this courtyard, and from it on the side away from the open space, they
saw various rooms. Agis pushed back a door, and called to the children
to follow him.

“It is past noon,” he said, “and our meal is already served. Enter and
eat with us.”

Full of curiosity, Rachel and Diana followed the boy into a room whose
walls were covered with large black panels upon which were painted
figures in brilliant colours. Surrounding each panel there was a
rich border of painted flowers. In the midst of the room, placed on
trestles, was a table, at which the men of the family were already
seated. The father, a middle-aged man, dressed very much in the same
fashion as Agis, except that he wore a saffron-coloured instead of a
white cloak, looked up and smiled as the boy entered. But he took no
notice of the two little girls, and they felt quite sure he neither saw
nor heard them.

Seated near to him was a very handsome young man who looked about
nineteen or twenty. Except that his curly hair was dark and his eyes
brown, instead of grey, he was so like Agis that the children knew he
must be the brother Phidolas, of whom he had spoken.

Agis swung himself into his place at the table, which was spread with
dishes containing olives, figs, a sort of cream cheese, and flasks of
wine, and passed some of these things to his invisible guests.

“Phidolas and I are, as a matter of course, in training for the games,”
he said. “Therefore we must eat only of such diet as this. But it may
be that simple food pleases you? Eat and drink, and fear no questions
from my father and brother. The magic of Sheshà protects you, and they
are ignorant of your presence.”

Rachel and Diana were too interested to care much for food, though the
ripe figs they tasted were delicious. They cast quick glances about a
room so strange to them, and noticed that it contained scarcely any
furniture. Except for the simple trestle table, and the chairs round it
which were of a beautiful shape and had curved arms, there were only
two tripods, each holding an elegant vase, placed in corners against
the walls. The door opened upon the colonnade, and beyond it they saw
the courtyard with its roof of wonderful blue sky.

“To-morrow at this hour we shall be upon the journey!” exclaimed Agis,
addressing his brother. “And at this hour three days hence thou wilt
without doubt be in the midst of the race, Phidolas!”

“The gods grant thee victory, my sons,” said the father gravely. “I
pray to them for their favour and protection.”

Before long the three were in animated talk about the games, and the
children listened eagerly to discussions as to which of the candidates
from Athens had the best chances of victory.

“All goes well with thy mare, I trust?” asked Agis, presently, turning
to his brother.

“With Aura all is well,” returned Phidolas cheerfully. “Let us now go
to her stable and see that she is fed.”

The boys rose, and at the moment two slaves entered, who, taking the
dishes from the table, removed the board and the trestles, thus in less
than two minutes leaving the room practically empty.

“_Our_ dinners take much longer to clear,” murmured Rachel. She looked
at Agis. “Haven’t you any mother? Or any sisters?” she asked.

“Oh, yes,” said the boy. “My mother lives, and I have two sisters. But
they are not with us, of course.”

“Why not?” demanded Diana.

Agis stared. “Always I forget you are strangers!” he declared,
laughing. “They are in the women’s part of the house, where they live.
They do not pass their time with us. In our country such is not the
custom. Look yonder!” He took them out into the courtyard and pointed
to where, through a passage, they saw another open space surrounded by
a colonnade.

“That is the women’s quarter,” he explained, carelessly. “There my
mother and sisters live and do their work.”

“What sort of work?” asked Rachel.

Agis shrugged his shoulders. “The usual work of women. They and the
female slaves spin wool for our garments and cook our meals and prepare
medicines and cordials in case of illness.... But come, follow me, and
you shall behold Aura, who is well worthy of your regard.”

“I shouldn’t like to have been a Greek girl in Athens long ago, would
you?” whispered Rachel to Diana. “It must have been horribly dull!”

“I wonder what Agis thinks of _us_,” chuckled Diana. “He’s never met
girls like us before. You can see that. Sheshà seems to be able to
do anything he likes in any country. No wonder everyone calls him
‘greatest of magicians.’”

They were following Agis and Phidolas all this time, and presently
through a door that led from the covered colonnade came to a yard, in
which stood a stable built of rough stones. Aura, the mare of which
they had heard so much, was looking over its low door, and, at the
sight of her, both children cried out in delight.

“She’s almost prettier than Bucephalus,” Rachel declared. “Look at her
lovely brown satin coat, and her sweet beautiful eyes!”

“And doesn’t she simply _love_ Phidolas?” exclaimed Diana. “Look at her
now.” The beautiful creature was rubbing her head against the young
man’s shoulder while he talked to her, as though she were a human being.

“Thou wilt win me the race, is it not so, my lovely one?” he murmured
in her ear, while Agis, after patting her shining neck, went to fetch a
handful of corn.

“Oh, Rachel, if _only_ we could go to Olympia and see the games!”
sighed Diana. “But you heard what Agis said. The journey will take
about three days, so of course we couldn’t——”

       *       *       *       *       *

She broke off in the midst of the sentence to rub her eyes. Rachel was
rubbing hers also.

“Where are we?” she began incoherently, gazing about her.

“We were looking at Aura—and now—oh, Rachel, I do believe it’s
_Olympia_!” the last words were uttered with a gasp of excitement.

“It _is_. I’m sure it is,” Rachel agreed.

“Then we must have passed over three days in just that second while we
stood by the stable. How could we possibly have done that?”

“Sheshà says Time is a magic thing,” returned Rachel, dreamily. “And
it isn’t, anyhow, more wonderful than all the other things that have
happened.... Just see how lovely everything looks, Diana. Don’t let’s
bother about how we got here.”

“The sun is just going to rise, isn’t it?” whispered Diana, still
bewildered and rather awed by the suddenness of this change of scene.

They were standing on a rocky spur of mountain looking down upon a huge
circular space, enclosed by tier above tier of empty seats.

On the left, through a gap in the hills, they saw the calm blue sea,
stretching away to where above the horizon the sun, like a shield of
fire, was just rising. In front of them, and overshadowing part of the
enclosed space (which at once reminded the children of a huge circus
ring) there lay a thick wood.

Everything was very still. Not a sound broke the silence, and there
was something in the appearance of the vast empty ring with the empty
seats about it, and the mountains and the sea as background, which for
a moment was rather terrifying.

Diana drew closer to Rachel.

“I wish someone would come,” she murmured.

It was just then that a well-known voice made the children turn
with joyful relief to see Sheshà. They knew him at once, though he
was dressed in the Grecian costume to which they were now growing
accustomed.

“Oh, we’re so glad you’ve come!” sighed Rachel. “It was getting lonely
here. This is Olympia, isn’t it? But where is Agis?”

“And Phidolas?” put in Diana.

[Illustration]

“This is Olympia, on the western shores of Greece. Here, when the sun
has fully risen on this the first day of the games, will be held those
contests renowned throughout the world. From every part of Greece the
competitors have already arrived, Agis and Phidolas among them. The
youths are lodged in yonder town; and in all the villages near, other
athletes, as they are called, have found lodging. Ere long they will
begin to assemble.”

“And you will tell us all about it!” exclaimed Diana. “Better than
Agis, because _you_ know who we are, and he can’t understand—lots of
things. But he’s awfully nice,” she added hastily.

[Illustration: THE OLYMPIC GAMES]

Sheshà smiled.

“Come with me, and, before the games begin, I will show you what I can.
First shall you see the temple which encloses one of the Wonders of the
World.”

“One of the Seven Wonders?” asked Rachel.

“One of the Seven Wonders,” repeated Sheshà.

In another second, and without knowing how they reached it, the
children found themselves standing near a temple in front of which
stretched the wood they had seen from the mountain side.

“This is the famous temple of Zeus or—to give him the name more
familiar to your ears—of Jupiter Olympius. He it was who, according to
the Greeks, first commanded these games—the Olympic Games—to be held.
Later you shall behold the great statue it contains. For the moment let
us wander a little through this wood, sacred to Jupiter.”

“These are oak trees. It’s an oak wood,” said Rachel, who was wise in
knowledge of the country and its trees and flowers.

“Yes, because the oak is the special tree of Jupiter—his sacred tree.
Therefore, very rightly, an oak wood stretches before his temple.”

“Oh, there’s a statue!” exclaimed Diana suddenly, pointing to where,
between the trees, she had caught sight of a gleam of white.

“There’s a whole line of them,” she went on. “Do let us go and look.”

“Patience,” counselled Sheshà. “We shall pass them on our way. These,”
he said, when in a moment or two they had reached the marble figures,
“these are the statues representing those youths who, as victors in the
Olympic Games, claimed the right to have their statues set up in the
sacred wood. Some of them, as you behold, are already ancient, for it
is long, long ago since these contests first began.”

“Where are we exactly—in the ‘Past,’ I mean?” asked Rachel. “Has
Alexander the Great conquered Greece yet?”

Sheshà shook his head. “Alexander is as yet unborn. The games you will
behold to-day are full a hundred years before his time. Greece, though
declining from the height of her glory, is still free.”

“Oh, look! There’s quite a little boy here,” cried Diana, who was
carefully examining the statues. “Anyhow, he doesn’t look any older
than Agis. But _he_ must have won a prize, I suppose, or his statue
wouldn’t be here?”

“It has sometimes happened that young children have been victors,” said
Sheshà. “That child was one of them.”

Rachel and Diana gazed admiringly at the slim graceful figure of the
boy.

“How pleased he must have been!” exclaimed Diana. “Oh, wouldn’t it be
joyful if Agis should win to-day?”

“The funny part of it is,” began Rachel, slowly, “that it’s
settled—one way or the other. We shall be seeing all over again
something that’s already happened, you know. It’s awfully uncanny when
you come to think of it, isn’t it?”

Sheshà smiled, and gently smoothed her hair.

“All new ideas appear ‘uncanny’ at first, little maid. Yet the familiar
is really quite as marvellous as the little known.... Come now, it is
time we returned, for the sun is mounting higher, and the competitors
will be arriving. We will return to this sacred wood, and to the
temple, at the end of the day. Then shall you behold the great statue
of Zeus, the Seventh Wonder of the World.”

Almost before he had finished speaking, the children found themselves
back again in the huge “circus-ring” with its background of mountains!
But now it was no longer empty. An enormous multitude of people filled
the seats surrounding the hollow space, and from the crowd there rose a
murmur like the hum of thousands of bees.

Rachel and Diana, seated on either side of Sheshà, in “the best
places of all,” as Diana excitedly whispered, looked round them with
amazed curiosity. First they let their eyes wander over the rows of
spectators, clad in the Greek dress that was still strange to the
sight of little English girls. The general colour of the crowd was
white, varied by patches of the crimson and green and blue of many of
the cloaks.

Overhead was the glorious blue sky, and the sun’s rays, warm but not as
yet too hot, streamed over and lighted up the wonderful scene, which
every moment grew more interesting and animated.

“That,” said Sheshà, pointing to the clear space below, “is the place
of combat, called the _stadium_. And, now, behold the judges are just
about to take their places.”

There was a raised platform or daïs in the middle of the stadium, and
towards this the children saw several stately figures advancing. In a
few moments these men, seated in chairs of a shape like those they had
already seen in the home of Agis, had taken up their position on the
daïs, each one holding on his knee a crown of olive leaves, and in his
hand a palm branch.

“What are those for?” Rachel asked.

“To crown the victors. They are the only prizes, and are more eagerly
coveted than gold or precious stones. To win those simple crowns
the youths of Greece train strenuously for years. You have already
in Athens seen a gymnasium. That to which Agis belongs, is only one
of hundreds, as such training schools exist all over Greece, for
the teaching of these physical exercises which have made the Greek
nation the most beautiful in the world.... Here come some of the
competitors—the _athletes_, to give them the right name. Behold them!”

“Oh, look! look, Diana!” shouted Rachel, pointing to where a procession
of boys on horseback came riding into the stadium.

“What does it remind you of?” asked Diana quickly.

“Why, it’s exactly like that marble picture of boys riding we
saw—where was it? Why, on the Parthenon temple, of course!”

“But we saw it first in the British Museum,” Diana reminded her.

“Where it rests now, having been torn from one of the noblest temples
in the world,” said Sheshà, sadly. “The sculptor who made that frieze,
the great Phidias, must have many times seen processions like to this,”
he added, pointing to the beautiful boys who, mounted on no less
beautiful horses, were now cantering round the stadium while the crowd
applauded loudly.

“Yes! Yes! It’s just as though those marble boys had come to life,”
declared Diana, excitedly.

“Oh, look!” interrupted Rachel, still more thrilled. “There’s Phidolas
riding upon his lovely horse! Oh, don’t they look splendid together?”

“And there’s Agis!” cried Diana, jumping up and clapping her hands. “Do
you see? With a crowd of other boys, just coming in. Oh, this is simply
_frightfully_ exciting!”

Sheshà laughed. “Listen to the heralds,” he counselled. “The games are
just about to begin.”

A silence all at once fell upon the vast swaying crowd, while several
men with trumpets, advancing from the centre of the stadium and
addressing the people, cried out the names of the competitors, and the
cities from which they came.

Rachel and Diana exchanged delighted glances when the name of Agis of
Athens was announced among the rest, and, after the last notes of the
trumpets had died away, they saw the athletes being arranged for the
first race.

“That’s the umpire, I suppose?” whispered Rachel, pointing to a man who
was marshalling the boys.

Sheshà nodded, and, a second later, Diana asked eagerly: “What are they
doing now?” For one of the umpires was reciting something in a loud
voice, to which all the competitors replied with a shout of assent.

“The athletes are taking the oath to observe all the rules of the
games, and to gain no advantage by means unfair and dishonourable,”
explained Sheshà.

“Look! Look! They’re off,” cried Rachel, as she pranced up and down,
quite unable to keep still.

Like a streak of white lightning round the ring, the boys and young
men rushed with a swiftness which made the children hold their breath.
Shouts of encouragement and of delight from the audience accompanied
their course, and, after a few moments of tense excitement, the
trumpets blew, and, yes—! It was the name of Agis that resounded
through the stadium! There came a hurricane of applause in which the
children madly joined. Then other contests took place.

Each one of these, the wrestling, boxing, quoit throwing, and
especially the chariot racing, had its separate thrill, and was
followed with breathless interest by the crowd. But it was the great
horse-race to which both the children looked forward with the most
intense longing—the race in which Phidolas and his beautiful mare,
Aura, were to compete. At last it came. There were many competitors,
all of them splendid youths, mounted upon splendid horses. But, while
preparations for the start were being made, Rachel and Diana’s eyes
strayed oftenest to Phidolas and Aura.

A deep sigh from both of them told of their suspense, when like an
arrow from a bow, Aura sprang forward with her rider, and the whole
crowd of horsemen were off like the wind.

Once round the stadium had the racers been, when suddenly a great cry
arose from the spectators. Phidolas had been thrown! For a second he
lay on the ground, till the umpires, rushing forward, dragged him out
of the way of thundering hoofs. Then a mighty clamour arose....

“What are they saying? Oh, what _is_ it they’re shouting?” begged the
children, wild with anxiety.

“They are pitying Phidolas, since it was to keep faithfully the rules
of the race that he was unseated,” explained Sheshà. “Did you not see
how he swerved to avoid hindering the rider that followed him in his
course?”

But the children scarcely listened, for another shout, this time of
amazement, made them look to where everyone was pointing.

Wonder of wonders, Aura, unchecked in her speed by the fall of her
master, was racing as though he had still been on her back to guide her!

On she flew, keeping the pace well, though two or three other horses
had already outstripped her. The crowd had become silent, too full of
wonder and interest to shout, and all eyes followed Aura, who was still
a little behind the foremost riders.

And now, at the last round, according, as Sheshà explained, to the
usual custom, the heralds raised their trumpets, and blew strong blasts
to encourage the racers.

At the sound, pricking up her ears, Aura gathered herself together,
and, with a flying leap, outdistanced the foremost horsemen, and amidst
the deafening cries and applause of the spectators, was first to reach
the goal!

Nor was this all. No sooner was the race at an end, than, throwing up
her graceful head, she trotted to the daïs where the judges sat, and
stood meekly before them.

“Oh, the darling lovely thing!” cried the children, incoherently,
amidst the tumult. “She’s won! She’s won! The judges _must_ say she’s
won!”

And they did. In another moment the children saw two umpires leading
Phidolas, unhurt, between them. Lightly he sprang upon the back of his
mare, and as wild shouts rent the air, the judges placed the wreath of
olives upon his close-cropped curly head, and proclaimed him and his
horse joint victors.

After this wonderful thing had happened, it seemed almost impossible
that there should be any greater excitement in store. Yet when,
preceded by heralds blowing trumpets, the successful athletes marched
round the stadium and the air rang with the shouting and applause of
the multitude, it seemed that _this_, after all, was the greatest
moment of the day. It was difficult to decide which of the two
brothers, Phidolas or Agis, was received with the wildest enthusiasm.
When Agis was crowned, the people roared their applause because of his
youth (and, indeed, as he followed the heralds he looked a charming,
but very little boy). And when Phidolas, in his turn, rode round the
stadium, the people were again worked up to a frenzy of delight, and
Aura, as though she knew that part of the applause was meant for her,
stepped proudly, and arched her glossy neck, while her beautiful dark
eyes thanked the people for praising her.

“Oh, won’t their father be proud!” exclaimed Rachel. “Fancy having two
sons winning the olive wreath!”

“Will they have their statues put up in the sacred wood?” Diana asked.

“Yes—and there also will be the statue of the mare, Aura,” said Sheshà.

Diana jumped for joy. “So she ought! So she ought! She deserves it,”
she cried.

“Nor does the triumph of those athletes who have conquered end here,”
Sheshà went on to say. “When they return, each to his native city, the
whole population will come forth to greet them. The victor belonging to
each city, wearing his olive crown, will be placed in a chariot. Torch
bearers will receive and run before him, and, when he approaches the
wall of his native town, he will find that a breach has been made in it
through which he will drive in triumph instead of entering at any one
of its gates. In such honour do the citizens of Greece hold a victor in
the Olympian Games.”

“I expect Phidolas and Agis will drive in the same chariot when they
get back to Athens?” suggested Diana. “Oh, won’t their father be
pleased. I’m glad. He looked such a nice man.”

“He _has_ been pleased, you mean,” said Rachel, rather quietly. “It all
happened long ago.”

“It’s so difficult to remember that,” murmured Diana.

There was a little silence, and then Rachel exclaimed:

“See, the people are going. Is this the end of the games?”

“It is the end of the first day’s contests,” Sheshà replied. “There
will be yet four days, but these will not be wholly occupied by the
racing and wrestling and quoit-throwing. Poets will read their odes
in praise of the victors. Plays by the greatest dramatists in Greece
will be judged and acted, and musicians will play the music they have
composed. Olympia does not exist solely for the body. It is for the
spirit also. And some of the most famous plays in the world have been
acted here.”

“Oh, can’t we see them too?” begged the children. “Why need we go on
into the Present at all?” added Diana. “The Past is so wonderful.”

Sheshà smiled at her kindly. “The Present is wonderful too. It’s _all_
wonderful. Come now, and you shall behold yet another wonder, for the
people are going to the temple of Zeus, where the victors will worship
and give thanks. We will follow them, and you shall have a glimpse of
the statue which Phidias made in honour of Zeus, or to give him his
other name—of Jupiter Olympius.”

“He’s called that because his temple is here at Olympia, I suppose?”
Rachel said. “Agis told us something about Phidias. He made the statue
of Minerva in the Parthenon, didn’t he?”

“And the frieze of riding boys too,” put in Diana.

“Yes—he was the sculptor who adorned the Parthenon at Athens,” said
Sheshà, as they followed the huge crowd that was moving towards the
temple of Zeus. “But the citizens were ungrateful to him. Therefore he
left Athens, and came to live here, near Olympia. And for the people
of this part of Greece, he carved a statue even larger and more famous
than that of Minerva in the Parthenon—the statue you are about to
behold.”

“Look! The doors are open now. They were shut when we saw the temple
before,” cried Rachel.

“Let us walk where we may gain a view through the gates,” Sheshà
suggested. In another moment the children saw the interior of the
temple.

There, towering upwards to the height of sixty feet, they caught a
glimpse of a majestic figure. It gleamed with the white ivory and
flashed with the gold which crowned it, and for a second they saw a
grand calm face looking down upon the olive-wreathed victors who bowed
low before the shrine.

“You behold the masterpiece of Phidias—the Seventh Wonder of the
World,” murmured Sheshà. “Jupiter Olympius from his temple blesses the
victors in the games he was the first to institute.”

The voice of their guide sounded so faint and far away that the
children scarcely caught the last words.

[Illustration]

But blending with them, uttered in fact almost at the same time,
came a remark from Mr. Sheston.... “You see where the frieze, now on
the walls of this Museum, really belongs? Phidias, the sculptor, in
all probability, saw just such a procession at the Olympic Games,
celebrated throughout the world, and even now not forgotten. Didn’t you
ask me what the word _Olympia_ meant? Now you know....”

“Yes, now we know,” said Rachel, slowly. She and Diana were still
standing by the glass case containing the model of the Acropolis of
Athens.

They both glanced quickly at Mr. Sheston, but his face was quite grave
as he looked at his watch.

“I think it’s time to go to my house for tea,” he said. “I expect
you’re tired?”

The children glanced at one another now, and smiled.

“We _ought_ to be—because we’ve been away about four days, really,”
whispered Diana, lingering a moment after Mr. Sheston turned to go.

“And yet I expect it wasn’t even four _minutes_!” was Rachel’s hurried
answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week from the day on which the children had seen Athens, sat through
the Olympic Games, returned to the British Museum and had tea with Mr.
Sheston—they were both in Aunt Hester’s drawing-room.

Rachel’s father and mother were also there, and the following morning
she and Diana were to return with them to the Seven Gables.

“Rachel looks in the seventh heaven of delight!” remarked Aunt Hester,
glancing with a smile at her niece, who sat on the arm of her father’s
chair.

“There’s _another_ ‘seven,’” Rachel whispered meaningly to Diana, when
the grown-up people began to talk amongst themselves....

“The Pyramids are amazing,” Rachel’s mother was saying, after she had
been describing what they had seen in Egypt. “Weren’t they counted
among the Wonders of the World? I’m not surprised.”

“It was the first Great Pyramid that was one of the Seven Wonders, I
think, wasn’t it?” Rachel’s father returned. “What were the others? I
don’t believe anyone knows!”

“We do!” exclaimed Rachel, suddenly. She really couldn’t help it.

Her mother and father laughed, but looked surprised.

“Well, what are they?” asked both of them, speaking together.

“There’s the Great Pyramid, and the Hanging Gardens at Babylon, and
the Colossus at Rhodes—” began Rachel, very quickly.

“And the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, and the Mausoleum at
Halicarnassus, and the Pharos at Alexandria,” added Diana with equal
speed.

“And the statue of Jupiter Olympius.”

The last one they said together, almost in the same breath.

“That’s seven,” was Rachel’s last word.

“Well, I never!” exclaimed her father. He looked across at Aunt Hester
and laughed again. “How on earth have they learnt all that?”

“Mr. Sheston, I expect,” returned his sister. “He was always taking
them to the British Museum.”

At the mention of the old man’s name, Rachel’s father glanced quickly
at his little daughter, who returned the look with a smile.

“Mr. Sheston is a wonderful old boy, isn’t he, Rachel?” he remarked
quietly.

[Illustration]

“Oh, yes!... And, Dad,” she began, moving even closer to him. “It’s
lovely to be going home, but I’ve enjoyed it _awfully_ here with Aunt
Hester, and Diana, and—Mr. Sheston. And it would be dreadful never
to come back again. I may—some time or other—mayn’t I?” she begged
earnestly.

“Oh, yes!” cried Diana, with equal fervour.

Rachel’s father put his arm round her.

“Of course you may,” he said, “if your aunt will have you.”

“Of _course_ I will,” returned Aunt Hester, looking gratified.

“I’m glad you like Mr. Sheston,” observed Rachel’s father, smiling
first at his little daughter, and then at Diana.

“Let’s give _seven_ cheers!” exclaimed Diana. And both children laughed.